[PR-1365] Parsing with Haskell (Part 2): Parsing with Happy (#14)
serokell/blog-posts: Alex and Happy Part 2/article.md

# Parsing with Haskell (Part 2): Parsing with Happy

<!--
* [X] refer to LR(1) article
* [X] link to its user guide
-->

This is the second and final part of the _Parsing with Haskell_ series.
Haven't read the first part yet? You can find it [here](https://serokell.io/blog/lexing-with-alex).

> As with Alex, our goal here is to provide enough information on Happy enough to be productive and do valuable things with it so that we won't visit every single feature of Happy.

Reviewer: > enough information on Happy enough

One "enough" is enough I think :sweat_smile: 

> so that we won't

s/ so that / hence /

```sml
let the_answer : int =
  let a = 20 in
  let b = 1 in
  let c = 2 in
  a * c + b * c

let main (unit : ()) : () =
  print ("The answer is: " + the_answer)
```

Some of the features that this tutorial will support are:
* Variables, constants, function declarations, function applications, local bindings, and operators.
* Some simple types, as well as arrow types (functions).
* Conditional expressions: if-then-else and if-then.
* Block comments (added in part 1).
* The reader will be invited in the proposed exercises to extend the language with patterns, list access, and pattern matching. The exercises in the first part also introduced rational numbers and line comments.

## Comparison with parser combinators

<!--
* [X] refer to parser combinators article
* [X] talk about the pros and cons
-->

In a previous tutorial, we discussed implementing and using [Parser Combinators in Haskell](https://serokell.io/blog/parser-combinators-in-haskell).
In the article, we discussed some pros and cons of LL parsers compared to LR parsers, which we will reiterate and elaborate on.

<!--
TODO: not sure how correct is the theory here, a more in-depth review here would be nice
-->

> Haskell libraries such as Megaparsec are typically exposed as a LL(1) or LL(∞) parser.

Reviewer: Right. So let me preface this with that I'm not necessarily an "expert" in the field, but I am pretty familiar.

So, as far as I understand, monadic parsers ultimately implement recursive descent with backtracking. From the top of my head, recursive descent with backtracking is strictly more powerful than LL(n) for any finite n, and is at least as powerful as LL(*) (not sure on LL(∞), I don't really grok purely theoretical parsers), but backtracking means performance can degrade to exponential in some cases.

It's not strictly correct to call monadic parsers LL(n), because LL family of algorithms is explicitly algorithms using push-down automata for top-down predictive (i.e. without backtracking) parsing, hence on deterministic grammars are linear in input length. All the usual caveats with left-recursive grammars apply to both LL and recursive descent of course.

Author: I see, I tried looking for more sources on it, although the closest I could find is that parser combinators work best on LL(1) grammars (but nothing was said that they are LL(1) parsers). Our Serokell articles also consider parser combinators as LL parsers, so maybe some correction will be needed in them as well.

I rephrased this part saying that they _work best_ with LL grammars, please let me know if it's still not adequate.

LL here means **L**eft-to-right parsing, **L**eftmost derivation, as they scan strings from left to right and build a tree deriving them from the left (see below).

The number between the parentheses indicates how many look-ahead tokens the parser can see.
A parser with a look-ahead of `k` can make decisions by looking `k` tokens (or characters) ahead.

> A look-ahead of `k=1` is often better for better performance, and it's enough to parse most grammars in programming languages.

Reviewer: > better for better performance

s/ better for / chosen for /

> enough to parse most grammars in programming languages

If we're still talking about LL(1), this is demonstrably false. Now, if you said "enough to parse most languages", I would have a harder time arguing against that, because even if a given grammar is not LL(1), there might exist another grammar describing the same language that is. Still, "most" is too strong of a word when talking about LL(1). In the majority of practical cases, LL(1) is inadequate.

Author: Thanks for the correction, in Appel's book, there is this figure:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30162364/171913489-944ff40b-d8e2-4bad-b592-0542686863f0.png)

I was under the impression that LL(1) is pretty powerful due to the size of its bubble. I changed it to LL(k) and I hope it will be more adequate than saying LL(1) is enough. Please let me know if it's still not adequate.

> On the other hand, Happy is an LR(1)\* parser, where the R means **R**ightmost derivation in reverse.

Reviewer: s/parser/parser generator/, and same below.

\* Happy is actually an LALR(1) (Look-Ahead LR) parser, which is a more performant albeit less powerful variant of an LR(1) parser; see [section 8.4.1](https://monlih.github.io/happy-docs/#_sec_conflict_tips) of the Happy User Guide.

> Happy also supports GLR (Generalized LR) parsing, which this tutorial won't cover, but you can find more about it in the [section 3](https://monlih.github.io/happy-docs/#_sec_glr) of the Happy User Guide.

Reviewer: I suggest wrapping this in `<details>` tag.

As an example, suppose we have the expression `1 + 2 + 3`, which is parsed as the following tree:

```text
                +
              ↙   ↘
            +       3
          ↙   ↘
        1       2
```

It means that in an expression such as `1 + 2 + 3`, a LL parser would expand the tree visiting the leftmost nodes first, visiting the tokens in this order:

<pre>
<u>exp</u>
<b><u>exp</u> + exp</b>
<b><u>exp</u> + exp</b> + exp
<b>1</b> + <u>exp</u> + exp
1 + <b>2</b> + <u>exp</u>
1 + 2 + <b>3</b>

> </pre>

Reviewer: Okay, so LL parser can't actually handle the grammar implied here, `exp ::= exp "+" exp | "1" | "2" | "3"` since it is left-recursive. This is frankly confusing. Let's have a short refresher, shall we?

So, the second letter in L and R actually doesn't have much to do with trees by itself: it specifies which derivation the parser algorithm recovers.

Derivation is a sequence of substitutions of non-terminals according to the grammar production rules. We're interested in _leftmost_ derivations, wherein the _leftmost_ possible non-terminal is replaced on each step, and _rightmost_ derivations, wherein correspondingly the _rightmost_ possible non-terminal is replaced on each step.

You _can_ represent a derivation as a tree, but IMO it's more helpful to get away from trees first and think about simple text substitutions.

Author: :facepalm: good point about left recursion, I explicitly detailed the grammar and removed the left recursion. Also right-balanced the tree.

> n.b.: **Bold** means the result of the derivation, and <u>underline</u> means the derivation that will be expanded next.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this diagram and underline doesn't work in GitHub preview for some reason

Author: As per @lierdakil's suggestion, I've defined the grammar for it, I hope it will be a bit clearer. But if it isn't, tell me and I will change it.

I replaced the underline with italic, it's not as visible, but it seems to work at least...

Whilst an LR parser would do the following:

<pre>
<u>exp</u>
<b>exp + <u>exp</u></b>
exp + <b>exp + <u>exp</u></b>
exp + <u>exp</u> + <b>3</b>
<u>exp</u> + <b>2</b> + 3
<b>1</b> + 2 + 3
</pre>

For more information on leftmost and rightmost derivations, see [LL and LR Parsing Demystified](https://blog.reverberate.org/2013/07/ll-and-lr-parsing-demystified.html).

Another difference is that Alex is a lexer generator and Happy a parser generator.

> It means that instead of writing Haskell files (`.hs`) like in parser combinators, you will write Alex (`.x`) and Happy (`.y`) files, which in turn will automatically generate Haskell files with the described grammar.

Reviewer: >  Haskell files with the described grammar

This is somewhat confusing. Perhaps you meant to say "Haskell files with implementations of the lexer and parser recognizing the described grammar"?

Author: Yep, changed it to your suggestion, it's much clearer now.

Below are some pros and cons of Happy in comparison to, for example, Megaparsec:

Pros:
* LR parsers are more powerful than LL, allowing to parse more complex grammars with greater ease.
* Ambiguous grammars are reported to the user, allowing a greater trust in the parser's output and saving the debugging headache.
* LR grammars can handle left-recursion, while LL parsers can't.

Cons:
* Less idiomatic, as you need to write Alex and Happy grammars instead of Haskell code.
* Less flexible since you can't touch the algorithm on how Happy works. Meanwhile, you can easily create your functions for parser combinators.

> Comparing the implementations of both parsing techniques is beyond the scope of this post. Still, if you are interested, you may read the parser combinators article listed above, as well as [How to Implement an LR(1) Parser](https://serokell.io/blog/how-to-implement-lr1-parser).

Reviewer: s/listed/linked/?

## How it works

> An in-depth explanation of how an LR(1) parser works is well beyond the scope of this tutorial, but for this, we recommend you read our article, [How to Implement an LR(1) Parser](https://serokell.io/blog/how-to-implement-lr1-parser).

Reviewer: Two links to this article in a row feel a little jarring, perhaps remove the one above?

We will, however, introduce a few basic concepts required to understand this article better.

### Productions, terminals and non-terminals

> A **production rule** is a parsing rule, which we will use to describe our grammar.

Reviewer: > parsing rule

Well, actually, not really. As the name implies, it's a rule describing how to "produce" something -- in this case, a string corresponding to the grammar. I find it helpful to think about this way: a language (formally) is a set of strings (all possible grammatically correct sentences); most interesting languages are countably infinite; grammar describes a way to construct an arbitrary string (sentence) belonging to the language; hence grammars are a way to describe an infinite set of strings in finite space and time. Parsing is in this context nothing more than deducing how one would generate the input string given the grammar, i.e. with parsing you already have the result and you work backwards (hence why I find LR to actually surprisingly be more intuitive than LL)

Author: I was a bit confused at "string corresponding to the grammar". Happy might force Alex to consume the input string and produce the sequence of tokens. Would it be more correct, or should I leave "strings" there? That is, assuming here that a string is a traditional sequence of characters...

Reviewer: > I was a bit confused at "string corresponding to the grammar"

Yeah, not the greatest word choice on my part. What I meant was "a sentence in the language defined by the grammar". "String" as in "sequence of symbols", in this case specifically "sequence of terminals". This is commonly used, but yes, probably better go with "sentence".

It looks like so in Happy:

```happy

> myProduction

Reviewer: The header is not a production, it's a non-terminal (well, at least in context-free grammars it is). Again, a short refresher, just in case:

- A production is a substitution rule of the form α → β, where α and β are strings of terminals and non-terminals.
- A head of a production is the thing before the → (α above). It must not be empty (and in most practical cases, i.e. Type-1 grammars in the Chomsky hierarchy, contain at least one non-terminal)
- A body of a production is the thing after the → (β above). It may be empty.
- During derivation, rule heads are matched against the current "buffer", and the matching ones are replaced with corresponding rule bodies.
- A grammar may contain multiple rules with the same head. If multiple production rules match during derivation, an arbitrary one can be chosen.

Happy simplifies matters a little by requiring that production rules are written in the form `head : body1 | body2 | ...`, i.e. productions with the same head are merged together, and different bodies are separated by `|`.

Author: Thank you, I didn't know the names of all the parts of a production, and assumed that referring to everything as "production" would be appropriate, as well as that every terminal and non-terminal was a production. I reworded this part, could you review it again?

The ellipses here are not correct Happy grammar, and we use them to represent that more productions may be present.

`production@#` where `@` is some letter and `#` some number means that the parser must parse each production in succession.
The pipe (`|`) represents an alternation. The parser may parse any of the given productions, accepting the one that matches.
An alternative may be empty, meaning that `myProduction : { action }` is also accepted.
`action@` represents what the parser should do once successfully parsed that rule. Like in Alex, it may be any Haskell expression. More about this later.

Production rules may also have an optional type signature.
For instance, the declaration of `myProduction` could also have been written as such:

```happy
myProduction :: { MyType }
```

Where any Haskell type may replace `MyType`.

Later in the article, we will also use the following notation representing the same as above.
This is not valid Happy code, but it's what it uses for debugging information.

```
myProduction -> productionA1 productionA2 ...
myProduction -> productionB1 productionB2 ...
myProduction -> ...
```

There may be multiple productions in a single Happy file.

> A **terminal** is a production that has no children.

Reviewer: Okay, this is wrong, most definitely a terminal is not a production. Again, production is short for "production rule", terminals are symbols, not rules.

Again, as a refresher: a formal grammar consists of:

- A set of _terminals_. This is usually the language's lexis. Any sentence of the language consists only of terminals.
- A set of _non-terminals_. These are arbitrary identifiers used in the grammar. Non-terminals can not appear in a sentence of the language (that's why they're called non-terminals: the derivation process doesn't stop as long there are non-terminals in the string). Terminals and non-terminals together are called symbols.
- A set of production rules (I've described those above)
- A designated starting non-terminal, from which any grammatically correct string can be derived.

Author: I'm rusty at theory (and I admit there are holes in it as well), so I'm pretty happy that you're explaining it to me. I reordered the description of them to appear before production rules, and I hope that it's more appropriate now. n.b.: I was unsure how to use "lexis" as a singular word, so I replaced it with "lexical item" which also seems valid looking at Wikipedia.

In our grammar, the tokens produced by Alex will be terminals.

A **non-terminal** is a production that consists of a group of various other productions (they may be terminal or non-terminal).
In the example above, `myProduction` is non-terminal.

### Parser position

It's essential to introduce a notation that will be used later in this article.
We use a dot (`.`) to represent the current position of the parser.
For example, suppose we have the following:

```
exp -> exp . '+' exp
```

In this case, the parser has finished consuming the first `exp`, and it's about to consume the `+`.

### Look-ahead

The **look-ahead** represents the sequence of symbols that will be consumed next by the parser.
Happy is an LALR(1) parser, which means its look-ahead is 1, so it can see one incoming symbol.
In the `exp` example above, the look-ahead token will be `+`.

### Actions (shift, reduce, goto, accept)

When working with Happy, two core concepts that you need to know are **shifting** and **reducing**, which I'll briefly explain.

> An LR parser is also implemented as a state machine, like Alex. The parser contains a stack with all the tokens consumed during parsing.

Reviewer: > as a state machine

This is incorrect. Or, more accurately, incomplete. So there is a state machine LR uses to make parsing decisions (called an LR automaton, and it is a DFA). But at the same time, LR plugs the output of this finite-state machine into a push-down automaton. "State machine" refers to finite-state machines, and push-down automata are _not_ finite-state (well, unless you limit the size of the stack that is)

Author: I've changed it, please tell me if it's still not good enough.

The parser produces an action table describing how to make decisions based on its stack and the look-ahead token.

> **Shifting** means that the parser should push the look-ahead token on its internal stack, change (shift) its state, and continue parsing.

Reviewer: AFAIU, "shift" refers specifically to "shifting" (i.e. moving) the current input symbol to the top of the stack.

Author: I've rephrased this sentence, I hope it's better.

> **Reducing** means that the parser has accepted a production, and so it will pop tokens from the stack, run an action with the consumed input, and return to a previous state.

Reviewer: Not actually necessarily "previous state". Symbols (well, more commonly states corresponding to symbols) are popped from the stack, yes, but then a new symbol is pushed onto the top of the stack, representing the production head. That is, a string corresponding to the body of some production rule is "reduced" (kind of folded) into its head.

Which reminds me, I have a demo set up: https://lierdakil.github.io/parser-demo/. There's no lexer, so lexemes are separated by whitespace (it's just `words` unders the hood :sweat_smile:), choose LALR(1) in the drop-down at the top, click run, then use arrow buttons (or arrow keys) to step through the parsing process. The current stack is on the left, the current tree is on the right, the control table is in the center, the grammar is below, the input string is at the top. The action table consists of two parts, the one with terminals in the header is the "action" table, (to the right), the one with non-terminals in the header is the "goto" table. The "goto" table is used to decide what state to push onto the top of the stack after reducing.

Author: Wow, that is really amazing! My friend and I were looking for something just like this the other day but we couldn't find a good one... There's no way I won't add a link to it in the article.

Later on, we will introduce the concept of shift/reduce and reduce/reduce conflicts, which are ways that Happy tells us that the grammar is ambiguous.

There are also **goto** and **accept** actions.
Goto simply means that the parser should change states without consuming input.

> Accept is the last action performed by the parser when it has seen all input and reached EOF—accepting means that the program was successfully parsed.

Reviewer: Nitpick, but not necessarily EOF, you can set up a parser to parse only the valid prefix. That's almost never what you want, though.

But enough with theory, let's go to the practice and learn more concepts as we go through it.

## Our first parser

Below is a minimal definition of a grammar file that Happy can compile.
In addition, we inserted an extra `empty` rule which we will delete later, as it's there only to make Happy happy.

Make sure to put it in a new `Parser.y` file.
Like in Alex, the name doesn't need to be `Parser`, but it's essential to keep the `.y` extension.

```happy
{
{-# LANGUAGE DeriveFoldable #-}
module Parser
  ( parseMiniML
  ) where

import Data.ByteString.Lazy.Char8 (ByteString)
import Data.Maybe (fromJust)
import Data.Monoid (First (..))

import qualified Lexer as L
}

%name parseMiniML
%tokentype { L.RangedToken }
%error { parseError }
%monad { L.Alex } { >>= } { pure }
%lexer { lexer } { L.RangedToken L.EOF _ }

%%

empty : {}  -- only to get the file compiling; we will remove this

{
parseError :: L.RangedToken -> L.Alex a
parseError _ = do
  (L.AlexPn _ line column, _, _, _) <- L.alexGetInput
  L.alexError $ "Parse error at line " <> show line <> ", column " <> show column

lexer :: (L.RangedToken -> L.Alex a) -> L.Alex a
lexer = (=<< L.alexMonadScan)
}
```

> Happy has a similar structure to Alex, where we insert Haskell definitions at the top and the bottom of the file, with our parser being in the middle.

Reviewer: > with our parser being

Perhaps "parser definition"?

Likewise, anything between `{` and `}` is going to be inlined as well.

Let's quickly visit each part of this file, from top to bottom.
* The header contains the code that will generate the header of our Haskell file. Happy will generate the primary parsing function, `parseMiniML`, which we export.
  * `DeriveFoldable` allows us to write `deriving (Foldable)`, which will be helpful later.
  * We also import some extra things that will be useful in utilities later.

> * The following lines instruct Happy with extra information to generate the parser. The things we should provide to it include:

Reviewer: s/with extra information /on how exactly/

  in         { L.RangedToken L.In _ }
  if         { L.RangedToken L.If _ }
  then       { L.RangedToken L.Then _ }
  else       { L.RangedToken L.Else _ }
  -- Arithmetic operators
  '+'        { L.RangedToken L.Plus _ }
  '-'        { L.RangedToken L.Minus _ }
  '*'        { L.RangedToken L.Times _ }
  '/'        { L.RangedToken L.Divide _ }
  -- Comparison operators
  '='        { L.RangedToken L.Eq _ }
  '<>'       { L.RangedToken L.Neq _ }
  '<'        { L.RangedToken L.Lt _ }
  '<='       { L.RangedToken L.Le _ }
  '>'        { L.RangedToken L.Gt _ }
  '>='       { L.RangedToken L.Ge _ }
  -- Logical operators
  '&'        { L.RangedToken L.And _ }
  '|'        { L.RangedToken L.Or _ }
  -- Parenthesis
  '('        { L.RangedToken L.LPar _ }
  ')'        { L.RangedToken L.RPar _ }
  -- Lists
  '['        { L.RangedToken L.LBrack _ }
  ']'        { L.RangedToken L.RBrack _ }
  ','        { L.RangedToken L.Comma _ }
  -- Types
  ':'        { L.RangedToken L.Colon _ }
  '->'       { L.RangedToken L.Arrow _ }
```

These tokens will terminals used while writing the grammar. They are first-class, and we can use them among other productions.

### Semantic actions

> With the definitions of our tokens, we can now begin writing the parser itself.

Reviewer: Perhaps s/With the/Now that we have the/?

One instance of a conflicting parse is `if b then f x` when we arrive at `if b then f . x`.
Should it be parsed as `if b then (f x)` or `(if b then f) x`?

Shifting will cause the first parse to be accepted while reducing will cause the second parse to be accepted.
Remember, intuitively, shifting can be approximated as "continue parsing and see what we get" while reducing as "accept what we have so far".
This is why reducing inserts parenthesis right after `f` is parsed.

For now, just like we've split `exp` into `exp` and `atom` in the past, we can further split it:

```happy
exp :: { Exp L.Range }
  : expapp                   { $1 }
  | expcond                  { $1 }

expapp :: { Exp L.Range }
  : expapp atom              { EApp (info $1 <-> info $2) $1 $2 }
  | atom                     { $1 }

expcond :: { Exp L.Range }
  : if exp then exp          { EIfThen (L.rtRange $1 <-> info $4) $2 $4 }
  | if exp then exp else exp { EIfThenElse (L.rtRange $1 <-> info $6) $2 $4 $6 }
```

We use `expapp` to represent function applications, which will create a chain of `atom`s that represents the application.
Likewise, `expcond` represents the conditional expressions.

> Since the left-hand side of an application can't be an `if` expression anymore, the conflict is eliminated.

Reviewer 2: That is not true. You can just surround `if` expression with parentheses

Author: You're right, that was a poor choice of words on my part. I rephrased it.

* The performance will be more predictable, as Megaparsec can cause exponential time complexity with the use of `try`. In addition, Happy's "static" generated LALR algorithm has better known complexity constraints.

Cons:
* Less idiomatic, as you need to write Alex and Happy grammars instead of Haskell code.
* Less flexible since you can't touch the algorithm on how Happy works. Meanwhile, you can easily create your functions for parser combinators.

Comparing the implementations of both parsing techniques is beyond the scope of this post. Still, if you are interested, you may read the parser combinators article linked above.

## How it works

An in-depth explanation of how an LR(1) parser works is well beyond the scope of this tutorial, but for this, we recommend you read our article, [How to Implement an LR(1) Parser](https://serokell.io/blog/how-to-implement-lr1-parser).
We will, however, introduce a few basic concepts required to understand this article better.

### Terminals, non-terminals, and production rules

A **terminal** is a lexical item of the language; in our case they will be tokens that were produced by Alex.

> A **non-terminal** is an arbitrary identifier that's replaced by other terminals and non-terminals (terminals and non-terminals together are called **symbols**) to produce derivations.

Reviewer 3: The word derivation is not defined anywhere, it seems, or I glossed over it, which makes it very hard for me to understand the definition of non-terminal.

Author: I talk about derivations in the Happy vs. Megaparsec section, but I elaborated a tiny bit more on this part as well.

In the example below, `myNonTerminal` is non-terminal.

> A **production rule** is a rule describing how to "produce" a string that is a sentence corresponding to the grammar.

Reviewer 3: I think at this point the notion of sentences and "words" could be more intuitive. 

I also couldn't understand the purpose of this section at first. Searching for the word "terminal" gives me hope that it could perhaps be closer to the usage site with few adjustments.

Reviewer 3: Production rule, in particular, is quite hard to grasp if you don't understand that the action taken will be, for example, of adding to AST or interpreting.

Author: I made some adjustments here, and with the added example, I hope it will be easier to understand what it is.

It has form `a : b { action }`, which looks like so in Happy:

> ```happy

Reviewer 3: I had some difficulties grasping what this is.

You later have nice examples such as dec, I think it will be much clearer with those (perhaps obscure how actions look :) ) .

Author: I made a small concrete example, I hope it will be easier to understand with it.

```
myNonTerminal -> bodyA1 bodyA2 ...
myNonTerminal -> bodyB1 bodyB2 ...
myNonTerminal -> ...
```

There may be multiple productions in a single Happy file.

### Parser position

It's essential to introduce a notation that will be used later in this article.
We use a dot (`.`) to represent the current position of the parser.
For example, suppose we have the following:

```
exp -> exp . '+' exp
```

In this case, the parser has finished consuming the first `exp`, and it's about to consume the `+`.

### Look-ahead

The **look-ahead** represents the sequence of symbols that will be consumed next by the parser.
Happy is an LALR(1) parser, which means its look-ahead is 1, so it can see one incoming symbol.
In the `exp` example above, the look-ahead token will be `+`.

### Actions (shift, reduce, goto, accept)

When working with Happy, two core concepts that you need to know are **shifting** and **reducing**, which I'll briefly explain.

An LR parser also contains a state machine, similarly to Alex.
This finite-state machine is called an _LR automaton_, which is also a DFA, which is used to make parsing decisions.

> At the same time, the parser contains a stack with all the tokens consumed during parsing, making it a _pushdown automaton_.

Reviewer 3: Is a finite state machine, a stack, and an action table all that is necessary to make a parser? 

Perhaps we can have a nice illustration here so that it is easily graspable what are the "objects" we are talking about.

Author: I think the user can see the demo below since it illustrates what is said here. At least, I'm not sure what would be the best illustration here otherwise...

Reviewer: Traditionally (all coming back to the Dragon Book and probably even earlier), this kind of diagram is shown to compiler theory students with relation to LR parsing:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7275622/172454696-5cdfd6ad-308b-43f9-891f-17e3b0357acd.png)

I'm not sure if it's particularly useful however, in my experience those who understand this diagram, don't need it.

  * We also import some extra things that will be useful in utilities later.
* The following lines instruct Happy on how exactly to generate the parser. The things we should provide to it include:
  * One or more names for our parser. The syntax should be `%name PARSER_NAME [PRODUCTION]`. If the `PRODUCTION` is not given, it uses the first non-terminal that appears in the file.
  * What is the type of our tokens with `%tokentype`.
  * Which function should it call if there is a parse error with `%error`.
  * What is the monad that should be used and its canonical operations with `%monad` (we reuse `Alex` for simplicity).
  * Which function lexes tokens and how to extract the EOF token with `%lexer`.
* `%%`, after which we must specify the production rules for the grammar.
* A trailer to include more Haskell definitions, such as auxiliary files and the AST that will be built by the parser. You can also define those in another module if you prefer.

### Tokens

Since Happy operates on tokens, we must instruct it on how to match each token.
This is done using `%token`, which must be placed before the `%%` in the file.

> We list each token name that we've defined in our lexer and a Haskell pattern between braces indicating how to match it.

Reviewer 3: I found the "that we've defined in our lexer" a bit confusing because it made me look for Alex tokens on the left side, while they are on the right side.

This tutorial was written using GHC version 9.0.2, Stack resolver LTS-19.8, Alex version 3.2.7.1, and Happy version 1.20.0.

## Our grammar: MiniML

We've discussed the grammar in the previous article, but let's reintroduce it here.
MiniML (read as "minimal") will be a small grammar based on ML.
By the end of this tutorial, you will be able to parse programs such as the following:

```sml
let the_answer : int =
  let a = 20 in
  let b = 1 in
  let c = 2 in
  a * c + b * c

let main (unit : ()) : () =
  print ("The answer is: " + the_answer)
```

Some of the features that this tutorial will support are:
* Variables, constants, function declarations, function applications, local bindings, and operators.
* Some simple types, as well as arrow types (functions).
* Conditional expressions: if-then-else and if-then.
* Block comments (added in part 1).
* The reader will be invited in the proposed exercises to extend the language with patterns, list access, and pattern matching. The exercises in the first part also introduced rational numbers and line comments.

## Comparison with parser combinators

<!--
* [X] refer to parser combinators article
* [X] talk about the pros and cons
-->

> In a previous tutorial, we discussed implementing and using [Parser Combinators in Haskell](https://serokell.io/blog/parser-combinators-in-haskell).

Reviewer 3: Could this be Happy vs. Megaparsec section? 

E.g. first you can explain what these libraries are theoretically based on, then explain the differences in the power of those constructs.

This could also avoid the "parser combinators can technically be LR" comment

Author: Renamed it. But I also don't understand your point, what sorts of explanations are you looking for? Like _why_ is LR more powerful than LL? And about what these libraries are based on, I explained a bit more about LR in "How it works", do you want me to say more about how parser combinators and Happy work?

Reviewer 3: No, I meant the same thing that you have here already, nothing extra. The comment was about sequencing of things.

<!--
TODO: not sure how correct is the theory here, a more in-depth review here would be nice
-->

Haskell libraries such as Megaparsec work best on LL(1) or LL(∞) grammars and they're implemented as recursive descent parsers with backtracking.
As such, caveats like not being able to handle left-recursion also apply to them, besides that their performance can exponentially degrade due to backtracking.
LL here means **L**eft-to-right parsing, **L**eftmost derivation, as they scan strings from left to right and build a tree deriving them from the left (see below).

The number between the parentheses indicates how many look-ahead tokens the parser can see.
A parser with a look-ahead of `k` can make decisions by looking `k` tokens (or characters) ahead.
A look-ahead of `k=1` is often chosen for better performance, but popular parser combinatrs libraries offer an option to use an arbitrary `k` with the `try` function. A LL(k) parser is often enough to parse most grammars in programming languages.

On the other hand, Happy is an LR(1)\* parser generator, where the R means **R**ightmost derivation in reverse.

<details>
<summary>* A note on Happy</summary>

> * Happy is actually an LALR(1) (Look-Ahead LR) parser generator, which is a more performant albeit less powerful variant of an LR(1) parser; see <a href=https://monlih.github.io/happy-docs/#_sec_conflict_tips>section 8.4.1</a> of the Happy User Guide.

Reviewer 3: I think I'd prefer to be told that it is a LALR(1) parser outright. Otherwise, it might be a bit confusing. 

If you rename this section "comparison with Megaparsec et al", a full explanation will be right in place.

Author: Changed it.

Could you elaborate on your second point? As per your suggestion below, I renamed it to "Happy vs. Megaparsec". But I don't understand if you meant that this would provide a full explanation of how it compares to Megaparsec, or if you want me to provide more points about it.

Reviewer 3: I think that what you have now is good. 👍

* LR parsers can handle left-recursion, while LL parsers can't.

Cons:
* Less idiomatic, as you need to write Alex and Happy grammars instead of Haskell code.
* Less flexible since you can't touch the algorithm on how Happy works. Meanwhile, you can easily create your functions for parser combinators.

Comparing the implementations of both parsing techniques is beyond the scope of this post. Still, if you are interested, you may read the parser combinators article linked above.

## How it works

An in-depth explanation of how an LR(1) parser works is well beyond the scope of this tutorial, but for this, we recommend you read our article, [How to Implement an LR(1) Parser](https://serokell.io/blog/how-to-implement-lr1-parser).
We will, however, introduce a few basic concepts required to understand this article better.

### Terminals, non-terminals, and production rules

A **terminal** is a lexical item of the language; in our case they will be tokens that were produced by Alex.

A **non-terminal** is an arbitrary identifier that's replaced by other terminals and non-terminals (terminals and non-terminals together are called **symbols**) to produce derivations.

> In the example above, `myNonTerminal` is non-terminal.

Reviewer 4: "above" should be changed to "below"?

Author: Good catch, thanks for pointing it out. :+1: 

By the way, just curious, but how did you find this repo? We're happy (pun intended) because you're our first external reviewer in this repo.

Reviewer 4: You're welcome! :-)

@_lierdakil_ made a PR in `kmonad/kmonad` repo > checked his profile > found this PR in activity. I have read some of the Serokell's posts before, but didn't know about this repo until now.

---

Out of topic: There is also a small typo in "How to implement LR(1) Parser": in the pragraph that mentions `happy` and `yacc` for the first time: it starts with `I this article`, but `I` should have been `In`.

Author: Ah, I see, thanks for explaining. This is a pretty small world (the world of Haskell, that is), at least I feel like we frequently find the same people in different places.

This gives me an idea, @NaeosPsy, what do you think if we start linking to our GitHub repo? At the bottom of the articles, we write something like "Found a typo or something incorrect? Feel free to open an issue in our GitHub repo."

And thanks for mentioning the typo, we'll fix it.

It's essential to introduce a notation that will be used later in this article.
We use a dot (`.`) to represent the current position of the parser.
For example, suppose we have the following:

```
exp -> exp . '+' exp
```

In this case, the parser has finished consuming the first `exp`, and it's about to consume the `+`.

### Look-ahead

The **look-ahead** represents the sequence of symbols that will be consumed next by the parser.
Happy is an LALR(1) parser, which means its look-ahead is 1, so it can see one incoming symbol.
In the `exp` example above, the look-ahead token will be `+`.

### Actions (shift, reduce, goto, accept)

When working with Happy, two core concepts that you need to know are **shifting** and **reducing**, which I'll briefly explain.

An LR parser also contains a state machine, similarly to Alex.
This finite-state machine is called an _LR automaton_, which is also a DFA, which is used to make parsing decisions.
At the same time, the parser contains a stack with all the tokens consumed during parsing, making it a _pushdown automaton_.
The parser produces an action table describing how to make decisions based on its stack and the look-ahead token.

> **Shifting** means that the parser should push (shift) the current input symbol on the top of its internal stack, change its state, and continue parsing.

Reviewer 3: How about putting all four in a table or list with something like: "Here are the (kinds of) acceptable actions for the parser"

Reviewer 3: I think it is easier to understand them once they are all together.

**Reducing** means that the parser has accepted a production, and so it will pop symbols from the stack, push the symbol corresponding to the production head on the stack, and run an action with the consumed input.

> Later on, we will introduce the concept of shift/reduce and reduce/reduce conflicts, which are ways that Happy tells us that the grammar is ambiguous.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this is relevant here.

There are also **goto** and **accept** actions.
Goto simply means that the parser should change states without consuming input.
Accept is the last action performed by the parser when it has seen all valid input—accepting means that the program was successfully parsed, and it normally happens when it has reached EOF.

<details>
<summary>Interactive parser demo</summary>
If you'd like to see an interactive parser showing a step-by-step on how it works, you may be interested in Nikolay Yakimov's <a href=https://lierdakil.github.io/parser-demo/>parser-demo</a>. Change the dropdown menu to "LALR", press "Run", and use the arrows to step through the parsing process.

> The current stack is on the left, the current tree is on the right, the action table is in the center, the grammar is on the bottom, and the input string is at the top.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the demo, the current stack is on the left, the current tree is on the right, the action table is in the center, the grammar is on the bottom, and the input string is at the top.
```

The control table is divided in two parts:
* To the left, there is the _action_ table with the terminals.
* To the right, there is the _goto_ table, which is used to decide what state to push at the top of the stack after reducing.
</details>

But enough with theory, let's go to the practice and learn more concepts as we go through it.

## Our first parser

Below is a minimal definition of a grammar file that Happy can compile.
In addition, we inserted an extra `empty` rule which we will delete later, as it's there only to make Happy happy.

Make sure to put it in a new `Parser.y` file.

> Like in Alex, the name doesn't need to be `Parser`, but it's essential to keep the `.y` extension.

Reviewer 3: I have a 50/50 feeling that this is not a necessary note.

  -- Constants
  string     { L.RangedToken (L.String _) _ }
  integer    { L.RangedToken (L.Integer _) _ }
  -- Keywords
  let        { L.RangedToken L.Let _ }
  in         { L.RangedToken L.In _ }
  if         { L.RangedToken L.If _ }
  then       { L.RangedToken L.Then _ }
  else       { L.RangedToken L.Else _ }
  -- Arithmetic operators
  '+'        { L.RangedToken L.Plus _ }
  '-'        { L.RangedToken L.Minus _ }
  '*'        { L.RangedToken L.Times _ }
  '/'        { L.RangedToken L.Divide _ }
  -- Comparison operators
  '='        { L.RangedToken L.Eq _ }
  '<>'       { L.RangedToken L.Neq _ }
  '<'        { L.RangedToken L.Lt _ }
  '<='       { L.RangedToken L.Le _ }
  '>'        { L.RangedToken L.Gt _ }
  '>='       { L.RangedToken L.Ge _ }
  -- Logical operators
  '&'        { L.RangedToken L.And _ }
  '|'        { L.RangedToken L.Or _ }
  -- Parenthesis
  '('        { L.RangedToken L.LPar _ }
  ')'        { L.RangedToken L.RPar _ }
  -- Lists
  '['        { L.RangedToken L.LBrack _ }
  ']'        { L.RangedToken L.RBrack _ }
  ','        { L.RangedToken L.Comma _ }
  -- Types
  ':'        { L.RangedToken L.Colon _ }
  '->'       { L.RangedToken L.Arrow _ }
```

> These tokens will terminals used while writing the grammar. They are first-class, and we can use them among other productions.

Reviewer 3: There is something wrong with this line, I think. "will terminals used"

We've discussed the grammar in the previous article, but let's reintroduce it here.
MiniML (read as "minimal") will be a small grammar based on ML.
By the end of this tutorial, you will be able to parse programs such as the following:

```sml
let the_answer : int =
  let a = 20 in
  let b = 1 in
  let c = 2 in
  a * c + b * c

let main (unit : ()) : () =
  print ("The answer is: " + the_answer)
```

Some of the features that this tutorial will support are:
* Variables, constants, function declarations, function applications, local bindings, and operators.
* Some simple types, as well as arrow types (functions).
* Conditional expressions: if-then-else and if-then.
* Block comments (added in part 1).
* The reader will be invited in the proposed exercises to extend the language with patterns, list access, and pattern matching. The exercises in the first part also introduced rational numbers and line comments.

## Happy vs. Megaparsec

<!--
* [X] refer to parser combinators article
* [X] talk about the pros and cons
-->

In a previous tutorial, we discussed implementing and using [Parser Combinators in Haskell](https://serokell.io/blog/parser-combinators-in-haskell).

> In the article, we discussed some pros and cons of LL parsers compared to LR parsers, which we will reiterate and elaborate on.

Reviewer: Let's use a slightly more correct terminology and replace "LL" with "top-down", since that article actually discusses recursive descent with backtracking specifically, which are, along with LL, classified as top-down parsers.

<!--
TODO: not sure how correct is the theory here, a more in-depth review here would be nice
-->

Haskell libraries such as Megaparsec work best on LL(1) or LL(∞) grammars and they're implemented as recursive descent parsers with backtracking.
As such, caveats like not being able to handle left-recursion also apply to them, besides that their performance can exponentially degrade due to backtracking.

> LL here means **L**eft-to-right parsing, **L**eftmost derivation, as they scan strings from left to right and recovers a derivation them from the left (see below).

Reviewer: > recovers a derivation them from the left

First, grammar, there's a preposition missing between "derivation" and "them", I think. Second, how about just calling it a leftmost derivation?

> recovers a matching leftmost derivation

The number between the parentheses indicates how many look-ahead tokens the parser can see.

> A parser with a look-ahead of `k` can make decisions by looking `k` tokens (or characters) ahead.

Reviewer: s/characters/symbols/. While technically not necessarily incorrect, "character" implies "element of the alphabet", while lookahead looks up to `k` terminals (which correspond to lexemes). Since we didn't introduce terminals yet, it's fine to use "symbols". You could also use "lexemes" if you'd like.

> A look-ahead of `k=1` is often chosen for better performance, but popular parser combinatrs libraries offer an option to use an arbitrary `k` with the `try` function. A LL(k) parser is often enough to parse most grammars in programming languages.

Reviewer: > with the `try` function

`try` implements backtracking, not lookahead. But there is actually arbitrary lookahead in *parsec, using the `lookAhead` combinator (that said, it's generally implemented using backtracking under the hood, so the usual caveats about exponential backtracking unfortunately still apply)

Happy also supports GLR (Generalized LR) parsing, which this tutorial won't cover, but you can find more about it in the <a href=https://monlih.github.io/happy-docs/#_sec_glr)>section 3</a> of the Happy User Guide.

As an example, suppose we have the expression `1 + 2 + 3`, which is parsed as the following tree:

```text
            +
          ↙   ↘
        1       +
              ↙   ↘
            2       3
```

Which was generated from this grammar:

```
exp -> num
exp -> num "+" exp
num -> [0-9]+
```

It means that in an expression such as `1 + 2 + 3`, a LL parser would perform substitutions by visiting the leftmost nodes first, recovering the tokens in this order:

<pre>
<i>exp</i>
<b><i>num</i> + exp</b>
<b>1</b> + <i>exp</i>
1 + <b><i>num</i> + exp</b>
1 + <b>2</b> + <i>exp</i>
1 + 2 + <b><i>num</i></b>
1 + 2 + <b>3</b>
</pre>

n.b.: **Bold** means the result of the derivation, and <i>italic</i> means the derivation that will be expanded next.

> Whilst an LR parser would do the following:

Reviewer: Okay, you're saying LR parser would do the following, but you're writing out a rightmost derivation instead. LR works in reverse. So maybe either change this sentence to talk about the rightmost derivation (and likewise above for the leftmost one), or expand on how an LR parser would actually work:

<pre>
. 1 + 2 + 3
<i>1</i> . + 2 + 3
<b>num</b> . + 2 + 3
num + . 2 + 3
num + <i>2</i> . + 3
num + <b>num</b> . + 3
num + num + . 3
num + num + <i>3</i> .
num + num + <b><i>num</i></b> .
num + <i>num + <b>exp</b></i> .
<i>num + <b>exp</b></i> .
<b>exp</b> .
</pre>

Side note, `num` should really have been recognized by the lexer before parser even begins its work.

Author: I changed the step-by-step of this derivation, although I'm not sure if we really need to keep these things here, or if it would be better to just remove them from the article.

<pre>
<i>exp</i>
<b>num + <i>exp</i></b>
num + <b>num + <i>exp</i></b>
num + num + <b><i>num</i></b>
num + <i>num</i> + <b>3</b>
<i>num</i> + <b>2</b> + 3
<b>1</b> + 2 + 3
</pre>

For more information on leftmost and rightmost derivations, see [LL and LR Parsing Demystified](https://blog.reverberate.org/2013/07/ll-and-lr-parsing-demystified.html).

Another difference is that Alex is a lexer generator and Happy a parser generator.
It means that instead of writing Haskell files (`.hs`) like you do with Megaparsec, you will write Alex (`.x`) and Happy (`.y`) files, which in turn will automatically generate Haskell files with implementations of the lexer and parser recognizing the described grammar.

Below are some pros and cons of Happy in comparison to Megaparsec:

Pros:

> * LR parsers are more powerful than LL parsers, allowing to parse more complex grammars with greater ease.

Reviewer: While this is true (for a given lookahead), Megaparsec is not LL. LR parsers can handle arbitrary non-ambiguous context-free languages (but not all context-free grammars! that said, if a language is non-ambiguous and context-free, there exists an LR(1) grammar for it). Top-down backtracking parsers like megaparsec can handle _some_ context-sensitive languages, in addition to all context-free languages (but not necessarily efficiently!), and they technically can handle non-left-recursive non-ambiguous context-free grammars (and any CFG can be converted to a non-left-recursive CFG, albeit the standard algorithm for removing left recursion can lead to exponential growth of production rules, which is hardly practical).

Author: I feel a bit like I've cornered myself since I now feel like I'm talking about something I don't completely understand (I am a victim of the Dunning-Kruger effect it seems).

I wanted to introduce some theory and terminology to make Happy easier to grasp, but also not go too much in-depth with it. I decided to just remove this point to avoid making it feel overwhelming.

To be honest, I feel like there are other parts that could be deleted as well, by this judgment, so this is something to think about.

> * Ambiguous grammars are reported to the user, allowing a greater trust in the parser's output and saving the debugging headache.

Reviewer: Hate to be that guy, but _actually_, with an LL(k), a parser generator can tell you if a grammar is not LL(k) by construction (the only one _practical_ one I'm aware of that uses LL is ANTLR4). The only case where this is an actual drawback is hand-rolled parsers (whether recursive descent or shift/reduce).

Author: I changed it to mention parser generators.

> * LR parsers can handle left-recursion, while LL parsers can't.

Reviewer: This statement can be generalised: s/LR/bottom-up/; s/LL/top-down/.

* The performance will be more predictable, as Megaparsec can cause exponential time complexity with the use of `try`. In addition, Happy's "static" generated LALR algorithm has better known complexity constraints.

> 

Reviewer: One more drawback of top-down parsers in general, is dealing with operator precedence and associativity (especially with left-associative operators) is much more labour-intensive. There are helpers in parser combinator libraries to deal with that, but the moment you need something slightly non-standard, and you want to get with minimal backtracking, you're looking at writing a bunch of non-obvious parser rules by hand.

Cons:
* Less idiomatic, as you need to write Alex and Happy grammars instead of Haskell code.
* Less flexible since you can't touch the algorithm on how Happy works. Meanwhile, you can easily create your functions for parser combinators.

Comparing the implementations of both parsing techniques is beyond the scope of this post. Still, if you are interested, you may read the parser combinators article linked above.

## How it works

An in-depth explanation of how an LR(1) parser works is well beyond the scope of this tutorial, but for this, we recommend you read our article, [How to Implement an LR(1) Parser](https://serokell.io/blog/how-to-implement-lr1-parser).
We will, however, introduce a few basic concepts required to understand this article better.

### Terminals, non-terminals, and production rules

> A **terminal** is a lexical item of the language; in our case they will be tokens that were produced by Alex.

Reviewer: Technically more correct to say that terminals are represented by tokens. Technically, terminals are abstract symbols, while tokens are concrete data structures, so not exactly equivalent.

> A **non-terminal** is an arbitrary identifier that's replaced by other terminals and non-terminals (terminals and non-terminals together are called **symbols**) to produce derivations, i.e., how to join symbols together in a syntactically correct way.

Reviewer: >  i.e., how to join symbols together in a syntactically correct way.

Eh... I understand what you're trying to say here, but only because I know what a derivation is. I think to someone unfamiliar, this might be more confusing than helpful.

In the example below, `myNonTerminal` is non-terminal.

> A **production rule** is a rule describing how to "produce" a string that is syntactic valid according to the grammar. It joins tokens together to form a sentence.

Reviewer: Probably s/syntactic/syntactically/

Also, s/tokens/terminals/. Practically, tokens represent terminals, but saying grammar acts on terminals is a little more precise.

It looks like so in Happy:

```happy
myNonTerminal
  : bodyA1 bodyA2 ... { actionA }
  | bodyB1 bodyB2 ... { actionB }
  | ...
```

n.b.: The ellipses here are not correct Happy grammar, and we use them to represent that more symbols may be present.

`body@#` where `@` is some letter and `#` some number means that the parser must parse each body in succession.
The pipe (`|`) represents an alternation. The parser may parse any of the given bodies, accepting the one that matches.
An alternative may be empty, meaning that `myNonTerminal : { action }` is also accepted.

> `action@` represents what the parser should do once successfully parsed that rule, such as how to interpret what was parsed, or how to build a data structure. Like in Alex, it may be any Haskell expression.

Reviewer: Probably s/once successfully parsed/once it successfully parses/.

We don't generally like passive voice, so maybe s/was parsed/it has parsed/?

Production rules may also have an optional type signature.
For instance, the declaration of `myNonTerminal` could also have been written as such:

```happy
myNonTerminal :: { MyType }
  : bodyA1 bodyA2 ... { actionA }
  | bodyB1 bodyB2 ... { actionB }
  | ...
```

Where any Haskell type may replace `MyType`.

As a concrete example, here's how we could describe a non-terminal for arithmetic operations, whose action is to evaluate such operations:

```happy
arithmetic :: { Double }
  : number                    { $1 }
  | arithmetic '+' arithmetic { $1 + $3 }
  | arithmetic '-' arithmetic { $1 - $3 }
  | arithmetic '*' arithmetic { $1 * $3 }
  | arithmetic '/' arithmetic { $1 / $3 }
  | '(' arithmetic ')'        { $2 }
  | '-' arithmetic            { negate $2 }
```

> Each `$n` refers to a symbol in the production bodies, respectively. In this example, assume `number`, `'('`, `')'`, `'+'`, `'-'`, `'*'`, and `'/'` are terminals.

Reviewer: s/production bodies/corresponding production body/.

There are a few more steps to get this example running, such as dealing with operator precedence and associativity.
Our goal is to provide arithmetic operations for MiniML as well, so we'll describe how to do it later in the tutorial. :)

We will also use the following notation representing productions.
This is not valid Happy code, but it's what it uses for debugging information.

```
myNonTerminal -> bodyA1 bodyA2 ...
myNonTerminal -> bodyB1 bodyB2 ...
myNonTerminal -> ...
```

There may be multiple productions in a single Happy file.

### Parser position

It's essential to introduce a notation that will be used later in this article.
We use a dot (`.`) to represent the current position of the parser.
For example, suppose we have the following:

```
exp -> exp . '+' exp
```

In this case, the parser has finished consuming the first `exp`, and it's about to consume the `+`.

### Look-ahead

The **look-ahead** represents the sequence of symbols that will be consumed next by the parser.
Happy is an LALR(1) parser, which means its look-ahead is 1, so it can see one incoming symbol.

> In the `exp` example above, the look-ahead token will be `+`.

Reviewer: Here we can use "terminals" instead of "symbols", it is more precise.

### Actions (shift, reduce, goto, accept)

When working with Happy, two core concepts that you need to know are **shifting** and **reducing**, which I'll briefly explain.

An LR parser also contains a state machine, similarly to Alex.
This finite-state machine is called an _LR automaton_, which is also a DFA, which is used to make parsing decisions.
At the same time, the parser contains a stack with all the tokens consumed during parsing, making it a _pushdown automaton_.
The parser produces an action table describing how to make decisions based on its stack and the look-ahead token.
The items in the action table are described in the table below:

|Shift|Reduce|Goto|Accept|
|-|-|-|-|

> |**Shifting** makes the parser push (shift) the current input symbol on the top of its internal stack, change its state, and continue parsing.|**Reducing** indicates that the parser has accepted a production, and so it will pop symbols from the stack, push the symbol corresponding to the production head on the stack, and run an action with the consumed input.|**Goto** causes the parser to change states without consuming input.|**Accept** is the last action performed by the parser when it has seen all valid input—accepting means that the program was successfully parsed, and it normally happens when it has reached EOF.|

Reviewer: A technicality, but while in general with shift/reduce parsers might push grammar symbols onto the stack directly, with LR specifically, the parser pushes states onto the stack, not symbols. Each grammar symbol has one or more corresponding states, so you could reconstruct the symbols by looking at the stack, but not necessarily vice versa.

<details>
<summary>Interactive parser demo</summary>
If you'd like to see an interactive parser showing a step-by-step on how it works, you may be interested in Nikolay Yakimov's <a href=https://lierdakil.github.io/parser-demo/>parser-demo</a>. Change the dropdown menu to "LALR", press "Run", and use the arrows to step through the parsing process.

> In the demo, the current stack is on the left, the current tree is on the right, the action table is in the center, the grammar is on the bottom, and the input string is at the top.

Reviewer: I would add that one can actually input arbitrary strings and write arbitrary grammars in the demo (not guaranteed to be bug-free though :sweat_smile:), but there's no lexer, so the input string is a sequence of terminals separated by whitespace.

%monad { L.Alex } { >>= } { pure }
%lexer { lexer } { L.RangedToken L.EOF _ }

%%

empty : {}  -- only to get the file compiling; we will remove this

{
parseError :: L.RangedToken -> L.Alex a
parseError _ = do
  (L.AlexPn _ line column, _, _, _) <- L.alexGetInput
  L.alexError $ "Parse error at line " <> show line <> ", column " <> show column

lexer :: (L.RangedToken -> L.Alex a) -> L.Alex a
lexer = (=<< L.alexMonadScan)
}
```

Happy has a similar structure to Alex, where we insert Haskell definitions at the top and the bottom of the file, with the parser definition in the middle.
Likewise, anything between `{` and `}` is going to be inlined as well.

Let's quickly visit each part of this file, from top to bottom.
* The header contains the code that will generate the header of our Haskell file. Happy will generate the primary parsing function, `parseMiniML`, which we export.
  * `DeriveFoldable` allows us to write `deriving (Foldable)`, which will be helpful later.
  * We also import some extra things that will be useful in utilities later.
* The following lines instruct Happy on how exactly to generate the parser. The things we should provide to it include:

>   * One or more names for our parser. The syntax should be `%name PARSER_NAME [PRODUCTION]`. If the `PRODUCTION` is not given, it uses the first non-terminal that appears in the file.

Reviewer: > the first non-terminal that appears in the file

Technicality, but IIUC it specifically uses the head of the first production, which due to the syntax happens to be the first non-terminal. Up to you if you want to rephrase, either way is technically accurate.

Author: I left it as it is because it's also how the Happy user guide puts it:

> If this parameter is omitted, it defaults to the first non-terminal defined in the grammar.

-- | Performs the union of two ranges by creating a new range starting at the
-- start position of the first range, and stopping at the stop position of the
-- second range.
-- Invariant: The LHS range starts before the RHS range.
(<->) :: L.Range -> L.Range -> L.Range
L.Range a1 _ <-> L.Range _ b2 = L.Range a1 b2
```

The definition of `ìnfo` could be changed with a typeclass whose purpose is to match on the AST and extract its field, but here we take a shortcut.
If you want to understand better what's going on, I recommend checking the docs for [`First`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.16.1.0/docs/Data-Monoid.html#t:First).

### Parsing declarations

With it, we can improve our `dec` parser, as well as creating a few new parsers:

```happy
name :: { Name L.Range }
  : identifier { unTok $1 (\range (L.Identifier name) -> Name range name) }

dec :: { Dec L.Range }
  : let name '=' exp { Dec (L.rtRange $1 <-> info $4) $2 [] Nothing $4 }

exp :: { Exp L.Range }
  : integer    { unTok $1 (\range (L.Integer int) -> EInt range int) }
  | name       { EVar (info $1) $1 }
  | string     { unTok $1 (\range (L.String string) -> EString range string) }
```

> Happy provides the variables `$1`, `$2`, etc., that allow accessing the value of the parsed productions.

Reviewer: > the value of the parsed productions

Technically, it's semantic value of grammar symbols (terminals and non-terminals), not productions. Also bears mentioning that the semantic value of a terminal is the corresponding token (at least by default).

In the semantic action `EVar (info $1) $1`, for example, `$1` will have the type `Name Range`, which results from parsing `name`.

Likewise, in `dec`, `$1` will refer to the token `let`, `$2` to the parsed variable name, `$3` to the token `'='`, and `$4` to the parsed expression.

Notice that we now generalized `dec` to accept not only integers but any expression.

> Furthermore, we create its range by compromising the start of `let` to the end of `exp`.

Reviewer: > by compromising the start of `let` to the end of `exp`.

I failed to comprehend this sentence :confused:

Author: Yeah, it's confusing. I rephrased it.

```happy
arguments :: { [Argument L.Range] }
  : {- empty -}        { [] }
  | argument arguments { $1 : $2 }
```

I'm not personally a fan of doing this, but if this is clearer to you, feel free to do it. ;)

Even though this code works, it leads to some undesirable repetition.
Notably, we repeat two productions for accepting an optional type annotation.
Thankfully, Happy allows for _parameterized productions_, which you can think of as being similar to a function taking parsers as arguments.

Let us define a utility which we will call `optional`:

```happy
optional(p)
  :   { Nothing }
  | p { Just $1 }
```

The first alternative is to parse nothing, which we indicate by putting no productions in it and a semantic action returning `Nothing`.
The second alternative is to parse the given parser, called `p` here.

To parse the argument list, we will create another utility that parses a production `p` zero or more times, which we call `many`.

Additionally, it's recommended to use left recursions instead of right recursions, so we'd use `arguments argument` in the code above.
You would then call `reverse $1` (assuming `$1` is our list) or use a `Seq` to have the correct order.

> This is because Happy can parse left recursions more efficiently. See [2.2 Parsing sequences](https://monlih.github.io/happy-docs/#_sec_sequences) in the Happy user guide for more information. So let's also change this!

Reviewer: It might be interesting to note why that is. LR requires O(n) stack space for right recursion and only O(1) for left recursion, because with left recursion it can reduce right away, while with right recursion it has to shift the complete sequence onto the stack.

```happy
many_rev(p)
  :           { [] }
  | many(p) p { $2 : $1 }

many(p)
  : many_rev(p) { reverse $1 }
```

And now we can provide a definition of `dec` avoiding repetition:

```happy
typeAnnotation :: { Type L.Range }
  : ':' type { $2 }

argument :: { Argument L.Range }
  : '(' name optional(typeAnnotation) ')' { Argument (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $4) $2 $3 }
  | name                                  { Argument (info $1) $1 Nothing }

dec :: { Dec L.Range }
  : let name many(argument) optional(typeAnnotation) '=' exp { Dec (L.rtRange $1 <-> info $6) $2 $3 $4 $6 }
```

You may delete `arguments` with it as it's now unused.

> Finally, let's make the parse capable of parsing zero or more declarations:

Reviewer: s/parse/parser/?

```happy
decs :: { [Dec L.Range] }
  : many(dec) { $1 }
```

And change `parseMiniML` again:

```diff
-%name parseMiniML dec
+%name parseMiniML decs
```

We can now open GHCi and check whether our changes work:

```haskell
>>> runAlex "let id (x : int) : int = x" parseMiniML
Right
  [ Dec _
    (Name _ "id")
    [Argument _ (Name _ "x") (Just (TVar _ (Name _ "int")))]
    (Just (TVar _ (Name _ "int")))
    (EVar _ (Name _ "x"))
  ]
```

The complete code for this section may be found [here](https://gist.github.com/heitor-lassarote/8c490c9b2772c764bce835505979cd59).

### Parsing types

Besides parsing type names, we would like to parse functions, the unit type, and lists.

> Parsing a unit, parenthesis, or a list is trivial. First, we extend the `Type` AST with new productions:

Reviewer: s/productions/nodes/? It's not very meaningful to talk about productions _in AST_, really.

```haskell
data Type a
  = TVar a (Name a)

>   | TPar a (Type a)

Reviewer: Do we actually need `TPar`? I don't think it has any semantic meaning?

Author: Eh, it doesn't, but I'd prefer to keep it, maybe the user might want it for pretty printing or something.

Reviewer: Well, sure, if you want to. But usually in AST we don't really want that (I wrote enough toy compilers to know from experience). Deciding whether to put parentheses or not in the output is non-ambiguous given operator precedence (it's how Haskell's Show works), which will "eat" redundant parentheses, sure, but I would argue it's not necessarily a bad thing.

Author: I mostly meant if the user wanted to make a pretty printer that keeps the redundant parentheses (I would be annoyed if a pretty printer removed them), but I added a few more words about this.

  | TUnit a
  | TList a (Type a)
  | TArrow a (Type a) (Type a)
  deriving (Foldable, Show)
```

> And we add it to our `type` production::

Reviewer: s/.*/And we add the corresponding `type` productions to the grammar:/

```happy
type :: { Type L.Range }
  : name           { TVar (info $1) $1 }
  | '(' ')'        { TUnit (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $2) }
  | '(' type ')'   { TPar (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) $2 }
  | '[' type ']'   { TList (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) $2 }
```

What about the arrow type? Well, let's try it out. Add it to the `type` production:

```happy
  | type '->' type { TArrow (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 $3 }
```

And after compiling it, you should see the following message:

```
shift/reduce conflicts:  1
```

This message indicates that the parser has found an ambiguity in our grammar, which should be resolved.

To illustrate this problem, consider how this production could be parsed when given the input `int -> int -> int`.
The first way it could be parsed is `(int -> int) -> int`.
The second way it could be parsed is `int -> (int -> int)`, which we desire.

> ### LR(1) conflicts

Reviewer: These conflicts are inherent to all shift/reduce parsers, not just LR.

Author: Changed it to just "Conflicts".

exp -> exp '*' exp . (rule 1)
exp -> exp . '+' exp (rule 2)</pre>
    </td>
    <td>
      <pre>'+'     shift, and enter state D (reduce using rule 1)
'*'     shift, and enter state C (reduce using rule 1)
%eof    reduce using rule 1</pre>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>B</td>
    <td>
      <pre>exp -> exp . '*' exp (rule 1)
exp -> exp . '+' exp (rule 2)
exp -> exp '+' exp . (rule 2)</pre>
    </td>
    <td>
      <pre>'+'     shift, and enter state D (reduce using rule 2)
'*'     shift, and enter state C (reduce using rule 2)
%eof    reduce using rule 2</pre>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>C</td>
    <td>
      <pre>exp -> exp '*' . exp (rule 1)</pre>
    </td>
    <td>
      <pre>integer shift, and enter state E
exp     goto state A</pre>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>D</td>
    <td>
      <pre>exp -> exp '+' . exp (rule 2)</pre>
    </td>
    <td>
      <pre>integer shift, and enter state E
exp     goto state B</pre>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>E</td>
    <td>
      <pre>exp -> integer .     (rule 3)</pre>
    </td>
    <td>
      <pre>'+'     reduce using rule 3
'*'     reduce using rule 3
%eof    reduce using rule 3</pre>
    </td>
  </tr>

> </table>

Reviewer: I don't understand this table.

LALR parser for this grammar has at least 7 states (8 if we operate on extended grammar):

1. starting state, `. exp`
2. `exp .`
3. `exp * . exp`
6. `exp + . exp`
7. `integer .`
8. `exp * exp .`
9. `exp + exp .`

The issue I have is you appear to have merged states (2) and (6) and (2) and (7)?

Reviewer: Ah, no, that's my bad, (6) and (7) also both include `exp . * exp` and `exp . + exp`.

Still, considering I got confused, this probably needs some elaboration.

Author: I've added all other states, I hope it will be a bit less confusing.

n.b.: I omitted some states for brevity.

Remember that the dot (`.`) here indicates where the parser stopped while consuming input.
For example, the first position in state A means that the parser has just finished consuming the first expression and it's about to consume a star.

> State A happens after we have consumed a `*`, while state B happens after consuming a `+`.

Reviewer: Wait, so you say "in state A [...] parser is [...] about to consume a star", but here "State A happens after we have consumed a star". I think something went wrong here.

Author: In the second case, I meant that state A happens after state D. But yes, it's confusing, so I added all states to the table and tried to make it more clear, there are only 9 of them, to be honest.

Suppose we use `1 + 2 * 3` as the input, and suppose that the parser has arrived at `1 + 2 . * 3` in state B (coming from state D).
It may either _shift_ to consume the `*` and go to state C or _reduce_ to accept that it has finished consuming the addition.

In other words, if it shifts, it will parse `1 + (2 * 3)`, giving priority to `*`, and if it reduces, it will parse `(1 + 2) * 3`, giving priority to `+`.
So if we want `*` to bind tighter than `+`, we want to reduce.

Likewise, what if we have `1 + 2 + 3` as the input?
Supposing that we stopped at `1 + 2 . + 3`, we enter state B again (coming from state D).
It may either be parsed as `(1 + 2) + 3` or `1 + (2 + 3)`.
If we shift, we make `+` right-associative, resulting in `1 + (2 + 3)`.
If we reduce, we make `+` left-associative, resulting in `(1 + 2) + 3`.

It means that an LR parser can use shift/reduce conflicts to either shift or reduce, allowing the programming to specify precedences and associativities for operators.

> ##### Dangling else

Reviewer: If you think about it, "dangling else" is exactly the same as operator precedence problem:

`if ... then (if ... then ... else)` corresponds to `else` binding tighter than `if`, while `if ... then (if ... then) ... else` corresponds to `else` binding looser.

Author: Yep, I left it there because Appel's book also describes these two as fam cases in conflicts, and I think it makes for a nice example as well. But I left a note saying that this is no different from the operator problem.

The second well-known case is the dangling-else problem, which is a conflict that arises when a language supports both if-then and if-then-else expressions (such as MiniML).
The expression `if a then if b then x else y` is ambiguous and may be parsed either as `if a then (if b then x else y)` or `if a then (if b then x) else y`.

Typically, the first interpretation is desirable.
To illustrate, let's see once again the parsing states:

```
exp -> if exp then exp . else exp
exp -> if exp then exp .
```

If we reduced, we would accept the input and get `if a then (if b then x) else b`. So we want to shift instead to continue parsing and get `if a then (if b then x else y)`.

#### Reduce/reduce conflicts

> The second type of conflict is a reduce/reduce conflict, meaning that there are two or more possible non-terminals that the parser can accept.

Reviewer: > meaning that there are two or more possible non-terminals that the parser can accept

Depending on what you mean, it might be technically correct, but it's pretty ambiguous. Perhaps:

> meaning that the parser can reduce an expression using different production rules.

``````

Simplifying this code a bit gives us:

```haskell
[ Dec _
  (Name _ "f")
  []
  (Just (TArrow _ (TVar _ (Name _ "int")) (TArrow _ (TList _ (TVar _ (Name _ "int"))) (TUnit _))))
  (EVar _ (Name _ "x"))
]
```

So we succesfully parsed the example as `int -> ([int] -> ())`.

The complete code for this section may be found [here](https://gist.github.com/heitor-lassarote/d9d6cd856584ab60cf7b3da4932dfc01).

### Parsing expressions

> Finally, let's move on to the last kind of production we want to parse: expressions.

Reviewer: The use of "production" here is somewhat questionable.

For now, we can parse three simple expression types: integers, variables, and strings.
Expressions are often more complicated than this, as they may have function applications, list literals, local variable declarations, conditionals, etc.

To begin, let's enrich our `Exp` AST with the remainder of the nodes:

```haskell
data Operator a
  = Plus a
  | Minus a
  | Times a
  | Divide a
  | Eq a
  | Neq a
  | Lt a
  | Le a
  | Gt a
  | Ge a
  | And a
  | Or a
  deriving (Foldable, Show)

data Exp a
  = EInt a Integer
  | EVar a (Name a)
  | EString a ByteString
  | EUnit a
  | EList a [Exp a]

>   | EPar a (Exp a)

Reviewer: Again, do we actually need `EPar`?

Author: Same as before, it has no semantic meaning, but I prefer to leave it there.

* `EBinOp`: The application of a binary operator to two expressions. `2 * 3 - 5`.
* `EOp`: A binary operator without operands. `(+) x 1`.
* `ELetIn`: Locally declares a variable. `let x = 5 in my_function x`.

We've previously defined a few primitives, namely `integer`, `name`, and `string`.
We may now add a few more simple productions.
Just so we're on the same page, I'll repeat the productions of `exp` that we already had.

```happy
exp :: { Exp L.Range }
  : integer                  { unTok $1 (\range (L.Integer int) -> EInt range int) }
  | name                     { EVar (info $1) $1 }
  | string                   { unTok $1 (\range (L.String string) -> EString range string) }
  | '(' ')'                  { EUnit (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $2) }
  | '[' sepBy(exp, ',') ']'  { EList (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) $2 }
  | '(' exp ')'              { EPar (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) $2 }
```

The only thing new here is the introduction of a new `sepBy` function, which should separate various productions (`exp`) by a separator (`,`), just like a list in Haskell.
The definition of `sepBy` is provided below.

```happy
sepBy_rev(p, sep)
  :                     { [] }

>   | sepBy(p, sep) sep p { $3 : $1 }

Reviewer: I think you wanted to use `sepBy_rev` here, otherwise you'd be reversing the tail on each element, and that's not what you want.

Author: Agh! Seems like I did the same mistake in `many` as well. :/

Fixing it actually caused 1 shift/reduce conflict in the solution of the exercises that can be resolved by using `many_rev` directly instead of `many`. Man, I wish Happy had an `%inline` directive...

sepBy(p, sep)
  : sepBy_rev(p, sep) { reverse $1 }
```

Parsing such "atoms" is simple enough, but now we will find difficulties in parsing the other types of expressions, as they will have more complicated interactions.

#### Parsing function applications

Let's begin with `EApp`. You might want to add a new production defining it like so:

```happy
  | exp exp                  { EApp (info $1 <-> info $2) $1 $2 }
```

But immediately see that it will produce five shift/reduce conflicts.
The ambiguity comes from the fact that `a b c` could be parsed either as `(a b) c` or `a (b c)`.
If you analyze the output of `happy -i src/Parser.y`, you should see that it can either shift to another token or reduce it to a function application.

Remember, shifting asks Happy to continue parsing, making the output right-associative, while reducing asks Happy to accept what we have so far, making the output left-associative.
Since shifting is the default action, we will get the incorrect output with `let x = a b c`:

```haskell
Right
  [ Dec _ (Name _ "x") [] Nothing (EApp _ (EVar _ (Name _ "a")) (EApp _ (EVar _ (Name _ "b")) (EVar _ (Name _ "c"))))
  ]
```

> Unfortunately, Happy doesn't have a `%reduce` directive, only a `%shift` directive.

Reviewer: Yes, but there is a `%prec` directive.

Author: Do you mean to use it like `exp exp %prec APP`? I could mention it, but in this situation, it causes a lot of shift/reduce and reduce/reduce conflicts, at least when using it with the finished grammar. I will mention it but continue with the current solution to avoid refactoring the current grammar and changing the article too much.

Reviewer: >  a lot of shift/reduce and reduce/reduce conflicts

Not if you list all terminals in the precedence table. But yes, that is annoying. There is however an argument to be made that it is often less annoying than rewriting the grammar.

Author: I see, thanks for explaining. I added a few more words about it.

Had we placed another token to the left or the right of `exp exp`, such as `exp exp in`, the ambiguity would be eliminated (in this specific case).

The solution is to extract all "atoms" into one production, and use `atom` on the right side of the application:

```happy
exp :: { Exp L.Range }
  : exp atom                 { EApp (info $1 <-> info $2) $1 $2 }
  | atom                     { $1 }

atom :: { Exp L.Range }
  : integer                  { unTok $1 (\range (L.Integer int) -> EInt range int) }
  | name                     { EVar (info $1) $1 }
  | string                   { unTok $1 (\range (L.String string) -> EString range string) }
  | '(' ')'                  { EUnit (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $2) }
  | '[' sepBy(exp, ',') ']'  { EList (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) $2 }
  | '(' exp ')'              { EPar (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) $2 }
```

This will cause Happy to build a chain `(((atom atom) atom) atom) atom` when parsing.
Note that even though the left side was stated to be an `exp`, eventually, we must reach an `atom` to terminate parsing.

> With it, function applications should now be left-balanced.

Reviewer: "balanced" feels like a wrong word here... "left-biased" perhaps? \<insert political joke here\>

```happy
  -- Arithmetic operators
  | exp '+'  exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (Plus (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
  | exp '-'  exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (Minus (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
  | exp '*'  exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (Times (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
  | exp '/'  exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (Divide (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
  -- Comparison operators
  | exp '='  exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (Eq (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
  | exp '<>' exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (Neq (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
  | exp '<'  exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (Lt (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
  | exp '<=' exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (Le (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
  | exp '>'  exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (Gt (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
  | exp '>=' exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (Ge (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
  -- Logical operators
  | exp '&'  exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (And (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
  | exp '|'  exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (Or (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
```

> n.b.: Do NOT extract these operators to a new production and change it to `exp operator exp` because of a limitation in Happy. This will cause conflicts that will be pretty difficult to resolve.

Reviewer: BTW, you can actually work around this by using `%prec`, but you _will_ have to list all lookahead terminals in the operator precedence table.

Author: I mentioned what you said in the article.

Remember that we previously defined the precedences and associativities of each operator; otherwise, Happy would generate 168 shift/reduce conflicts. I will copy and paste them here yet again in case you've missed them:

```happy
%right '->'
%left '|'
%left '&'
%nonassoc '=' '<>' '<' '>' '<=' '>='
%left '+' '-'
%left '*' '/'
```

With it, we now have 12 shift/reduce conflicts.

You could observe that the left-hand side of an operator is always an `atom` and change it accordingly, but this will be no good.

> Even though it would remove all of the shift/reduce conflicts, it would also have the side-effect that **the tree would always be right-balanced**.

Reviewer: again, probably s/balanced/biased/

    exp -> exp . '&' exp                                (rule 25)
    exp -> exp . '|' exp                                (rule 26)
    expcond -> if exp then exp else exp .               (rule 30)
```

So the issue is not caused by the interaction between operators with other operators but rather between operators with conditional expressions.

An example is `if true then 0 else 1 + 2`.
Is this `if true then 0 else (1 + 2)` (shift) or `(if true then 0 else 1) + 2` (reduce)?

You have a few choices here. The first is to split the expressions into even more productions, the second is to add a `%shift` directive to the `if-then-else`, and the third is to add an associativity and precedence to the `else`.

I don't want to fiddle too much with the grammar or the LR parsing table, so for now, let's add a precedence to `else`:

```diff
+%right else
 %right '->'
 %left '|'
 %left '&'
```

This will cause the `else` keyword to extend as far to the right as possible, as it will have precedence over everything else.

#### Parsing an operator atom

This case is trivial, albeit annoying. Just shove these up in `atom`:

```happy
  -- Arithmetic operators

>   | '(' '+' ')'              { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $2) (Plus (L.rtRange $2)) }

Reviewer: You probably want `EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3)` IIUC, below too.

Author: You have a good vision, I wouldn't have noticed the mistake.

  | '(' '<=' ')'             { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $2) (Le (L.rtRange $2)) }
  | '(' '>' ')'              { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $2) (Gt (L.rtRange $2)) }
  | '(' '>=' ')'             { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $2) (Ge (L.rtRange $2)) }
  -- Logical operators
  | '(' '&' ')'              { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $2) (And (L.rtRange $2)) }
  | '(' '|' ')'              { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $2) (Or (L.rtRange $2)) }
```

#### Parsing let-in

Finally, let's see `let...in...`, the final expression in our language.

Let's add a new case to `exp` and see what happens:

```happy
  | dec in exp               { ELetIn (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 $3 }
```

12 shift/reduce conflicts. Not cool. However, looking at `Parser.info`, this is a case that we are already familiar with, which is how conditional expressions interacted with operators, although now with `let...in...` instead of `if...then...else...`.

To illustrate, should `let a = b in a + b` be parsed as `(let a = b in a) + c` or `let a = b in (a + b)`? The second case is desirable, which is shifting when we reach `in`.

The solution is simply to add a precedence for `in`:

<!--

> TODO: I'm not entirely sure if there will be any problems in mixing else and in with the same precedence. Maybe one of the reviewers knows better.

Reviewer: Not really. You just have `let ... in ... else ... let ... in ...` all associate to the right, as it should be: `let ... (in ... (else ... let ... (in ...)))`

* Dealing with operator precedence and associativity requires less labor. In Megaparsec, there are standard tools like [`makeExprParser`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/parser-combinators-1.3.0/docs/Control-Monad-Combinators-Expr.html#v:makeExprParser) to deal with them, but once you need something that is non-standard, you'll need to write more non-trivial parser rules by hand.

Cons:
* Less idiomatic, as you need to write Happy grammars instead of Haskell code.
* Less flexible since you can't change Happy’s algorithm. Meanwhile, parser combinators enable you to easily create your own functions.

## How it works

An in-depth explanation of how an LR(1) parser works is well beyond the scope of this tutorial. For this, we recommend you read our article on [how to Implement an LR(1) Parser](https://serokell.io/blog/how-to-implement-lr1-parser).
We will, however, introduce a few basic concepts required to understand this article better.

### Terminals, non-terminals, and production rules

A **terminal** is a lexical item of the language. In our case, they will be represented by tokens that were produced by Alex.
They will represent the leaves of the syntax tree.

> A **non-terminal** is a description of how the grammar can group symbols together. It's an arbitrary identifier that's replaced by other terminals and non-terminals (terminals and non-terminals together are called **symbols**) to produce derivations. A sequence that doesn't match any non-terminal is considered a syntax error.

Reviewer: Now that I'm reading this after some time, we didn't introduce derivations prior, so this will read as Greek to someone unfamiliar. Perhaps we could introduce all terms in this section, starting with language? E.g.

A language (formally) is a (likely infinite) set of all grammatically correct sentences.

A grammar describes how to construct an arbitrary sentence of the language with simple string substitutions. Formally, a grammar consists of terminals, non-terminals, production rules and a designated starting non-terminal.

The process of constructing a sentence using the grammar is called a derivation.

Parsing is in some sense a process inverse to derivation, i.e. given the end result (the input string in parsing terms) we recover a derivation that produced it.

Author: @NaeosPsy, might as well put @lierdakil as a co-author given how much I copy-pasted from him.

Reviewer 3: If he's okay with that, sure. 👍

In the example below, `myNonTerminal` is non-terminal.
They will represent the internal nodes of the abstract syntax tree.

A **production rule** is a rule describing how to "produce" a string that is syntactically valid according to the grammar. It joins terminals together to form a sentence.
This is how it looks in Happy:

```happy
myNonTerminal
  : bodyA1 bodyA2 ... { actionA }
  | bodyB1 bodyB2 ... { actionB }
  | ...
```

n.b.: The ellipses here are not correct Happy grammar. We use them to represent that more symbols may be present.

* `body@#` where `@` is some letter and `#` some number means that the parser must parse each body in succession.
* The pipe (`|`) represents an alternation (an _or_). The parser may parse any of the given bodies, accepting the one that matches. A body of a production may be empty, meaning that `myNonTerminal : { action }` is also accepted.
* `action@` represents what the parser should do once it successfully parses that rule, such as how to interpret what it has parsed or how to build a data structure with it. Like in Alex, it may be any Haskell expression.

> Production rules may also have an optional type signature.

Reviewer: It might be a good idea to mention this is Happy-specific feature, not a theoretical construct.

s/Production rules may also have an optional type signature./In Happy, production rules may also have an optional type signature./

```happy
myNonTerminal :: { MyType }
  : bodyA1 bodyA2 ... { actionA }
  | bodyB1 bodyB2 ... { actionB }
  | ...
```

In the example above, any Haskell type may replace `MyType`.

As a concrete example, let's describe a non-terminal for arithmetic operations, the goal of which is to evaluate the operations.
Here, the entire snippet contains a production rule forming the `arithmetic` non-terminal.
Assume that `number`, `'('`, `')'`, `'+'`, `'-'`, `'*'`, and `'/'` are terminals.

```happy
arithmetic :: { Double }
  : number                    { $1 }
  | arithmetic '+' arithmetic { $1 + $3 }
  | arithmetic '-' arithmetic { $1 - $3 }
  | arithmetic '*' arithmetic { $1 * $3 }
  | arithmetic '/' arithmetic { $1 / $3 }
  | '(' arithmetic ')'        { $2 }
  | '-' arithmetic            { negate $2 }
```

Each `$n` refers to a symbol in the corresponding production body, respectively.

There are a few more steps to get this example running, such as dealing with operator precedence and associativity.
Our goal is to provide arithmetic operations for MiniML as well, so we'll describe how to do it later in the tutorial. :)

We'll also use the following notation to represent productions.

> This is not valid Happy code, but it's what it uses for debugging information.

Reviewer: Might be useful to note this notation closer corresponds to the notation used in formal language theory, but feel free to ignore this.

```
myNonTerminal -> bodyA1 bodyA2 ...
myNonTerminal -> bodyB1 bodyB2 ...
myNonTerminal -> ...
```

There may be multiple productions in a single Happy file.

### Parser position

It's essential to introduce a notation that will be used later in this article.
We use a dot (`.`) to represent the current position of the parser.
For example, suppose we have the following:

```
exp -> exp . '+' exp
```

In this case, the parser has finished consuming the first `exp`, and it's about to consume the `+`.

### Look-ahead

The **look-ahead** represents the sequence of symbols that will be consumed next by the parser.
Happy is an LALR(1) parser, which means its look-ahead is 1, so it can see one incoming symbol.
In the `exp` example above, the look-ahead symbol will be `+`.

### Components of an LR parser

> Similarly, to lexers generated by Alex, an LR parser also contains a state machine.

Reviewer: Stray comma after "Similarly":

s/Similarly,/Similarly/

This finite-state machine is used to make parsing decisions. It is a [deterministic finite automaton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deterministic_finite_automaton), and we call it an _LR automaton_.

At the same time, the parser contains a stack with all the tokens consumed during parsing, making it a [_pushdown automaton_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pushdown_automaton).
The parser generates an action table describing how to make parsing decisions while consuming the input stream, in accordance to the current stack and look-ahead.

Here are the possible actions in the action table:

> * **Shift** makes the parser push (shift) the state corresponding to the current input symbol on the top of its internal stack, change its state, and continue parsing.

Reviewer: > change its state

This feels redundant, I suggest cutting it.

> * **Reduce** indicates that the parser has accepted a production, and so it will pop symbols from the stack, push the symbol corresponding to the production head on the stack, and run an action with the consumed input.

Reviewer: s/push the symbol/push the state/ -- mostly for consistency with the previous bullet.

We will keep the AST in `Parser.y` for simplicity.

We will keep the AST small for now and grow it as needed.

```haskell
-- * AST

data Name a
  = Name a ByteString
  deriving (Foldable, Show)

data Type a
  = TVar a (Name a)
  deriving (Foldable, Show)

data Argument a
  = Argument a (Name a) (Maybe (Type a))
  deriving (Foldable, Show)

data Dec a
  = Dec a (Name a) [Argument a] (Maybe (Type a)) (Exp a)
  deriving (Foldable, Show)

data Exp a
  = EInt a Integer
  | EVar a (Name a)
  | EString a ByteString
  deriving (Foldable, Show)
```

Note the use of a polymorphic field in each constructor.
This is useful for storing extra parsing information in the tree.
In practice, range is the only thing we'll store there, but having this field can be helpful if you plan to reuse the tree in other parts of your compiler and need to store more information.

A few words about each new data type introduced:

* `Name` represents an identifier, such as a variable or a type name. You could also define a `TypeName` in addition to `Name`, but for simplicity, we will stay only with `Name`.

> * `Type` contains the type annotation of a declaration. MiniML will support functions, type names, the unit type, and lists. We'll start with type names and add the remaining types later.

Reviewer: s/functions/function types/?

-- | Performs the union of two ranges by creating a new range starting at the
-- start position of the first range, and stopping at the stop position of the
-- second range.
-- Invariant: The LHS range starts before the RHS range.
(<->) :: L.Range -> L.Range -> L.Range
L.Range a1 _ <-> L.Range _ b2 = L.Range a1 b2
```

The definition of `ìnfo` could be switched with a typeclass whose purpose is to match on the AST and extract its field, but here we take a shortcut.
If you want to better understand what's going on, I recommend checking the docs for [`First`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.16.1.0/docs/Data-Monoid.html#t:First).

### Parsing declarations

With the AST in hand, we can improve our `dec` parser and create a few new parsers:

```happy
name :: { Name L.Range }
  : identifier { unTok $1 (\range (L.Identifier name) -> Name range name) }

dec :: { Dec L.Range }
  : let name '=' exp { Dec (L.rtRange $1 <-> info $4) $2 [] Nothing $4 }

exp :: { Exp L.Range }
  : integer    { unTok $1 (\range (L.Integer int) -> EInt range int) }
  | name       { EVar (info $1) $1 }
  | string     { unTok $1 (\range (L.String string) -> EString range string) }
```

> Happy provides variables `$1`, `$2`, etc., that allow accessing the semantic value of grammar symbols.

Reviewer: Technicality, but s/variables/pseudo-variables/ maybe (because they're not really variables)

Author: The Happy user guide uses "symbols" to refer to the pseudo-variables, I changed to this instead for consistency.

> whenever the parser finds the symbols t_1…​t_n in the token stream, it constructs the symbol n and gives it the value E, which may refer to the values of t_1…​t_n using the symbols $1…​$n.

> By default, this is the corresponding token.

Reviewer: This is not entirely accurate. For terminals, the semantic value is the corresponding token, for non-terminals it's whatever the corresponding action returned.

What about the arrow type? Well, let's try it out. Add it to the `type` production:

```happy
  | type '->' type { TArrow (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 $3 }
```

And after compiling it, you should see the following message:

```
shift/reduce conflicts:  1
```

This message indicates that the parser has found an ambiguity in our grammar, which should be resolved.

To illustrate this problem, consider how this production could be parsed when given the input `int -> int -> int`.
The first way it could be parsed is `(int -> int) -> int`.
The second way it could be parsed is `int -> (int -> int)`, which we desire.

### Conflicts

<!--
* shift/reduce, reduce/reduce
  * former is easier to resolve and usually is less serious
  * latter must be avoided because it usually specifies a malformed grammar
* shifting on operators often means left precedence, reducing means right precedence
* example: if-then and if-then-else problem is trivially resolved by shifting instead of reducing
-->

> As previously mentioned, an LR(1) conflict indicates that the parser has found an ambiguity in the grammar.

Reviewer: s/an LR(1) conflict/a conflict/

As I mentioned previously, these sorts of conflicts are inherent to all shift/reduce parsers (and also recursive ascent), so it doesn't really make sense to call these LR(1) conflicts.

Furthermore, top-down parsers also can have conflicts, albeit slightly different: those also often indicate ambiguity (but more generally they indicate that a given parsing algorithm can't handle the given grammar).

Author: Changed it. Made a quick force-push to my latest fixup since I forgot about this review point, I hope it's OK.

Conflicts may be indicators of ill-formed grammars, and you should probably refactor them to avoid ambiguities.

> However, some cases can be reduced by explicitly telling Happy to either shift or reduce.

Reviewer: s/reduced/resolved/

Parsing such "atoms" is simple enough, but now we will find difficulties in parsing the other types of expressions since they will have more complicated interactions.

#### Parsing function application

Let's begin with `EApp`. You might want to add a new production defining it like so:

```happy
  | exp exp                  { EApp (info $1 <-> info $2) $1 $2 }
```

But we'll immediately see that it will produce five shift/reduce conflicts.
The ambiguity comes from the fact that `a b c` could be parsed either as `(a b) c` or `a (b c)`.
If you analyze the output of `happy -i src/Parser.y`, you should see that it can either shift to another token or reduce it to a function application.

Remember, shifting asks Happy to continue parsing, making the output right-associative, while reducing asks Happy to accept what we have so far, making the output left-associative.

Since shifting is the default action, we will get the incorrect output with `let x = a b c`:

```haskell
Right
  [ Dec _ (Name _ "x") [] Nothing (EApp _ (EVar _ (Name _ "a")) (EApp _ (EVar _ (Name _ "b")) (EVar _ (Name _ "c"))))
  ]
```

Unfortunately, Happy doesn't have a `%reduce` directive, only a `%shift` directive.

> Furthermore, using precedences here will not help us.

Reviewer: This sentence is in direct contradiction with the next paragraph. Maybe cut it?

Had we placed another token to the left or the right of `exp exp`, such as `exp exp in`, the ambiguity would be eliminated (in this specific case).

The solution is to extract all "atoms" into one production, and use `atom` on the right side of the application:

```happy
exp :: { Exp L.Range }
  : exp atom                 { EApp (info $1 <-> info $2) $1 $2 }
  | atom                     { $1 }

atom :: { Exp L.Range }
  : integer                  { unTok $1 (\range (L.Integer int) -> EInt range int) }
  | name                     { EVar (info $1) $1 }
  | string                   { unTok $1 (\range (L.String string) -> EString range string) }
  | '(' ')'                  { EUnit (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $2) }
  | '[' sepBy(exp, ',') ']'  { EList (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) $2 }
  | '(' exp ')'              { EPar (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) $2 }
```

This will cause Happy to build a chain like `(((atom atom) atom) atom) atom` when parsing.
Note that even though the left side was stated to be an `exp`, we must eventually reach an `atom` to terminate parsing.

> With this, function application should now be left-biased.

Reviewer: Uh... perhaps s/left-biased/left-associative/, since we're talking about an operator, not a tree here.

   | if exp then exp else exp { EIfThenElse (L.rtRange $1 <-> info $6) $2 $4 $6 }
```

As a sanity check in GHCi, we can check the (prettified and simplified) output for the ambiguous expression:

```haskell
>>> runAlex "let x = if a then if b then c else d" parseMiniML
Right
  [ Dec _ (Name _ "x") [] Nothing           -- let x =
    (EIfThen _ (EVar _ (Name _ "a"))        --   if a then
      (EIfThenElse _ (EVar _ (Name _ "b"))  --     if b
      (EVar _ (Name _ "c"))                 --     then c
      (EVar _ (Name _ "d"))))               --     else d
  ]
```

You can find the source code up to this point [here](https://gist.github.com/heitor-lassarote/ebfddb9b354bb63dda2f952947d09f84).

### Parsing negations

Now, let's make it so we're able to negate expressions.

This case is pretty simple, just stick this definition in `exp`:

```happy
  | '-' exp                  { ENeg (L.rtRange $1 <-> info $2) $2 }
```

This will also allow us to parse interesting cases, such as `-if True then 1 else 2` or `-succ 2`.
Try it in GHCi.
Both cases are valid Haskell code, and we also have made the first valid MiniML code now.

#### Parsing binary operators

> Now let's move on with parsing binary operators, where Happy will make us unhappy again.

Reviewer: s/with/to/?

* The performance will be more predictable, as Megaparsec can cause exponential time complexity with the use of `try`. In addition, Happy's "static" generated LALR algorithm has better known complexity constraints.
* Dealing with operator precedence and associativity requires less labor. In Megaparsec, there are standard tools like [`makeExprParser`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/parser-combinators-1.3.0/docs/Control-Monad-Combinators-Expr.html#v:makeExprParser) to deal with them, but once you need something that is non-standard, you'll need to write more non-trivial parser rules by hand.

Cons:
* Less idiomatic, as you need to write Happy grammars instead of Haskell code.
* Less flexible since you can't change Happy’s algorithm. Meanwhile, parser combinators enable you to easily create your own functions.

## How it works

An in-depth explanation of how an LR(1) parser works is well beyond the scope of this tutorial. For this, we recommend you read our article on [how to Implement an LR(1) Parser](https://serokell.io/blog/how-to-implement-lr1-parser).
We will, however, introduce a few basic concepts required to understand this article better.

> ### Terminology

Reviewer 3: With a little bit of effort, this can easily be a story not a terminology.

Author: Could you elaborate on this?

Reviewer 3: Well, it has a heading "terminology", which kind of implies a list of terms, which is usually very hard to grasp for people. 

But I "feel" these all things connect together in some kind of high-level description of languages and parsing, so I would rather have that. You just need to connect them with each other and add a bit more prose-like quality to it. 

I think I wrote about some details of this in some of the other comments.

Reviewer 3: E.g. imagine if the heading was:

### High-level overview of parsing 

and what would be the contents if you have the information that is in this section now. 

Hope it makes sense. 😅

Reviewer: I've spent a few minutes to sketch a draft of what that "story" could look like: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rYiknE8fDjwBljvZL-Vl4ImzEMQJVXAgRcdjfyLroEI/edit?usp=sharing

Fair warning: I do some simplifications there as to not get too deep into the weeds.

Author: OK, I rewrote this with a more prose-like style, and I also used a concrete example that should hopefully make things clearer.

Author: Hmm, I just saw your story, it's pretty nice, I'll rewrite this part again so I can use it. Or would it be better to not have Happy examples between the story?

Reviewer 3: It's good to have Happy examples interspersed, I believe.

Author: Done, reordered some parts and also took some liberties to rephrase some parts, and interspersed a few Happy examples in between the story.

Reviewer: As a general rule, it's good to have examples, period 🙂 I honestly would also include an example with on-paper derivation and draw parallels to tree building, but tbh what you have currently is good enough (aside from a couple small nitpicks), the article isn't about "a complete overly pedantic introduction to formal language theory" after all😅

A **language** (formally) is a (likely infinite) set of all grammatically correct sentences.

A **grammar** describes how to construct an arbitrary sentence of the language with simple string substitutions.
Formally, a grammar consists of terminals, non-terminals, production rules and a designated starting non-terminal.

The process of constructing a sentence using the grammar is called a **derivation**.

Parsing is in some sense a process inverse to derivation, i.e. given the end result (the input string in parsing terms) we recover a derivation that produced it.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sentences are built from symbols, which can be terminals or non-terminals. 
```

I think this would fit well here instead of being in parenthesis.

Reviewer: Sentences are built from terminals. Non-terminals can only occur during the derivation process, and must be replaced. The derivation process stops when there are no more non-terminals (well, with unrestricted grammars this might be relaxed, i.e. derivation might not stop when there are no more non-terminals, but by then we're in Markov's normalized algorithm territory)

A **terminal** is a lexical item of the language. In our case, they will be represented by tokens that were produced by Alex.

> They will represent the leaves of the syntax tree.

Reviewer: Perhaps better to say that terminals _correspond_ to the leaves of the syntax tree. Tree and derivation chain are two 
equivalent ways of representing the same process, so it seems slightly strange to say that elements of one represent the other.

A **non-terminal** is a description of how the grammar can group symbols together. It's an arbitrary identifier that's replaced by other terminals and non-terminals (terminals and non-terminals together are called **symbols**) to produce derivations. A sequence that doesn't match any non-terminal is considered a syntax error.
In the example below, `myNonTerminal` is non-terminal.

> They will represent the internal nodes of the abstract syntax tree.

Reviewer 3: The AST mention is hanging.

If we use the tree thing here, I would use the fact that readers know that we will end up with the abstract syntax tree. 

So I would repeat the fact that we are going to parse into an AST, and then tell that terminals will be the leaves of that tree, non-terminals will be the internal nodes, and the production rules are the valid ways of constructing that tree. Does that make sense?

Reviewer: Same thing about _represent_ vs _correspond_ here.

Author: I put an example of AST and some ASCII (Unicode?) art of what it looks like. Also used correspond instead of represent.

> A **production rule** is a rule describing how to "produce" a string that is syntactically valid according to the grammar. It joins terminals together to form a sentence.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A **production rule** is a rule describing how to "produce" a string that is syntactically valid according to the grammar. It joins symbols together to form a sentence.
```

Senpai, I saw something that's wrong! 😂

(If it was correct, sorry for looking like a moron. 🤣)

Reviewer: This is... Debatable. See, the end result only contains terminals, so the original sentence is not strictly speaking wrong.

Reviewer 3: Well, not wrong, but perhaps not 100% intuitive, especially in concordance with everything else? 🤔

It is somewhat odd to say that a carpenter joins together wood particles to build a house, for example.

I don't understand the topic, really, though.

Reviewer: I can't disagree with this assessment, it does seem somewhat confusing. So let's deconstruct this a little.

A production rule is just that -- a rule (one of many), which governs the derivation process. The rule by itself doesn't join anything: it says that if you have production head, you replace it with production body, and that's the end of it. One could argue that the actual "joinage" happens during the derivation process, but that's not strictly accurate either, because no explicit joining happens there, a single derivation step is a substitution, not a concatenation.

If you would like to relate this to trees, it might sound a little more intuitive. Derivation builds the tree one layer of a given subtree at a time. Non-terminals correspond to subtrees (strictly speaking _root nodes_ of subtrees), and terminals correspond to leaves. Each derivation step takes a given incomplete subtree and adds one layer to it, namely, adds all symbols from a given production body as direct children of the corresponding node.

  | ...
```

In the example above, any Haskell type may replace `MyType`.

As a concrete example, let's describe a non-terminal for arithmetic operations, the goal of which is to evaluate the operations.
Here, the entire snippet contains a production rule forming the `arithmetic` non-terminal.
Assume that `number`, `'('`, `')'`, `'+'`, `'-'`, `'*'`, and `'/'` are terminals.

```happy
arithmetic :: { Double }
  : number                    { $1 }
  | arithmetic '+' arithmetic { $1 + $3 }
  | arithmetic '-' arithmetic { $1 - $3 }
  | arithmetic '*' arithmetic { $1 * $3 }
  | arithmetic '/' arithmetic { $1 / $3 }
  | '(' arithmetic ')'        { $2 }
  | '-' arithmetic            { negate $2 }
```

Each `$n` refers to a symbol in the corresponding production body, respectively.

There are a few more steps to get this example running, such as dealing with operator precedence and associativity.
Our goal is to provide arithmetic operations for MiniML as well, so we'll describe how to do it later in the tutorial. :)

We'll also use the following notation to represent productions.
This is not valid Happy code, but it's what it uses for debugging information.

> This notation is also closer to what's used in formal language theory.

Reviewer 3: Small nitpick, I would drop this below the code sample since it is more of an aside.

In our case, we want to generate a bottom-up parser that will build an **abstract syntax tree** (AST), which is a data structure that describes the exact structure of the language we're parsing.

For an input like `-42 * f x`, we'd get a tree that looks like this:

```haskell
EBinOp _ (ENeg _ (EInt _ 42)) (Times _) (EApp _ (EVar _ "f") (EVar "x"))
```

It can be better visualized like this:

```haskell
                          EBinOp _
                         /   |    \
                  ENeg _     |     EApp _
                 /       Times _  /      \
        EInt _ 42                /        \
                       EVar _ "f"          EVar _ "x"
```

So that Happy could generate the parser, we need to provide a formal grammar in terms of terminals, non-terminals, and production rules. 

The terminals are going to be the tokens that were produced by Alex, and they will correspond to the leaves of the abstract syntax tree (`EInt`, `Times`, and `EVar` in the example above).

> This is how we can create terminals in Happy:

Reviewer 3: Since we said that terminals are Alex tokens, is it correct to say here that this is how we create them in Happy? We're just aliasing them here. 

I would suggest "This is how our terminals look in Happy:"

Reviewer: The correct word here is probably "define", i.e. "This is how we define terminals in Happy".

Reviewer 3: Sounds good. 👍

  in         { L.RangedToken L.In _ }
  if         { L.RangedToken L.If _ }
  then       { L.RangedToken L.Then _ }
  else       { L.RangedToken L.Else _ }
  -- Arithmetic operators
  '+'        { L.RangedToken L.Plus _ }
  '-'        { L.RangedToken L.Minus _ }
  '*'        { L.RangedToken L.Times _ }
  '/'        { L.RangedToken L.Divide _ }
  -- Comparison operators
  '='        { L.RangedToken L.Eq _ }
  '<>'       { L.RangedToken L.Neq _ }
  '<'        { L.RangedToken L.Lt _ }
  '<='       { L.RangedToken L.Le _ }
  '>'        { L.RangedToken L.Gt _ }
  '>='       { L.RangedToken L.Ge _ }
  -- Logical operators
  '&'        { L.RangedToken L.And _ }
  '|'        { L.RangedToken L.Or _ }
  -- Parenthesis
  '('        { L.RangedToken L.LPar _ }
  ')'        { L.RangedToken L.RPar _ }
  -- Lists
  '['        { L.RangedToken L.LBrack _ }
  ']'        { L.RangedToken L.RBrack _ }
  ','        { L.RangedToken L.Comma _ }
  -- Types
  ':'        { L.RangedToken L.Colon _ }
  '->'       { L.RangedToken L.Arrow _ }
```

These aliases to tokens are the terminals we'll use while writing the grammar. They are first-class, and we can use them among other symbols.

> ### Semantic actions

Reviewer 3: Given that there are no non-trivial semantic actions here, this sub-heading might not be accurate. 

Could I suggest `### First production rule`?

We will, however, introduce a few basic concepts required to understand this article better.

### Formal grammar 

When talking about parsing, we generally imply we're parsing some language, a formal language in the case of programming languages.
But what is a language?

Formal language theory offers a very simple answer: a language is a (likely infinite) set of all grammatically correct sentences.
Now, the word "sentence" is used in a very general sense here – a complete MiniML program would still constitute a sentence.

Well, but how do you describe an infinite set of sentences?
You do that by specifying how how to build any arbitrary sentence.

This description is called the formal grammar of the language.
The usual approach uses string substitutions to construct a sentence.
The process of constructing a sentence itself is called the derivation process, which is represented as a sequence of substitutions called a derivation chain.
We can refer to either as **derivation**.

We start with a special symbol called the start non-terminal. Then, we find and replace symbols according to our substitution rules. Once we have replaced everything we could have replaced, we stop.

> The symbols to be replaced are called **non-terminals**, and the symbols they are ultimately replaced by are called **terminals**. Non-terminals denote things that do not occur in the language itself. Terminals are usually the lexical items of the language – you can think of them being the "words" of the language. They are called so because derivation terminates on them.

Reviewer: A couple small nitpicks here:

> Non-terminals denote things that do not occur in the language itself

This is not exactly correct. The symbols we choose for non-terminals do not appear in the language (in some general sense), but the things they denote obviously do.

> Terminals are usually the lexical items of the language

Again, more correct to say terminals represent lexical items of the language; a lexeme might be "x", but the corresponding terminal is not necessarily "x", it might be "identifier", for example.

They are the rules that define the grammar (and, by extension, the language).
In formal language theory, we usually write them as `alpha -> beta`, where `alpha` is called the production head, and `beta` the production body.
In each step of derivation, some head is replaced by its corresponding body.

### Parsing with a grammar

Parsing is, in a sense, a process inverse to derivation. Instead of building an arbitrary sentence, we're given a sentence and tasked with recovering the derivation that produced it. 

There are two broad approaches to accomplish that. We could try to run the derivation process forwards, but at each step choose the substitution that would get us closer to the input string. This is top-down parsing. Not all grammars work well with this approach, but it is arguably more straightforward. 

Or we could run the derivation process in reverse by finding a production rule whose body matches some of the input string. We do that until we're back at the starting non-terminal. This is bottom-up parsing. It works well with more grammars (still not all of them, though), and that's the approach Happy adheres to.

> In our case, we'll generate a bottom-up parser that will build an **abstract syntax tree** (AST), which is a data structure that describes the exact structure of the language we're parsing.

Reviewer: s/exact structure of the language we're parsing/exact grammatical structure of the input/ perhaps?

  | name                     { EVar (info $1) $1 }
  | '(' exp ')'              { EPar (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) $2 }
```

To break down this syntax, let's look at each individual component.

**Head**

`exp :: { Exp L.Range }` is the head of the production. With it, you can use `exp` to refer to this non-terminal in other parts of the grammar. The type signature is optional, meaning that only `exp` without ` :: { Exp L.Range }` would also be accepted.

In context-free grammars (CFGs), which are what Happy supports, production heads always consist of a single non-terminal.
There also may be multiple production rules with the same head, which is how we encode multiple choices.

**Body**

Each sequence of symbols after `:` or after `|` indicates how to form a sentence of the language. For instance, `'(' exp ')'` is an expression wrapped in parentheses.

The pipe (`|`) represents an alternative (an _or_). This means that the parser may parse any of the given bodies, accepting the one that matches. 

The body of a production may also be empty, meaning that `myNonTerminal : { action }` is accepted.

**Action**

> Like in Alex, any expression betwen braces `{ }` indicates what the parser should do once it successfully parses that rule, such as how to interpret what it has parsed or how to build a data structure with it. We'll use the actions to build our AST.

Reviewer: "the" before "actions" seems dubious to me, we're not referring to concrete actions here, we're referring to an abstract category.

Disclaimer: I'm not an English language expert.

Reviewer 3: It is of dubious nature, yes.

"these actions" would be nice. 👍

Cons:
* Less idiomatic, as you need to write Alex and Happy grammars instead of Haskell code.
* Less flexible since you can't touch the algorithm on how Happy works. Meanwhile, you can easily create your functions for parser combinators.
* Dealing with operator precedence and associativity requires more labor. There are standard tools to deal with them, but once you need something that is non-standard, you'll need to write more non-trivial parser rules by hand.

Comparing the implementations of both parsing techniques is beyond the scope of this post. Still, if you are interested, you may read the parser combinators article linked above.

## How it works

An in-depth explanation of how an LR(1) parser works is well beyond the scope of this tutorial, but for this, we recommend you read our article, [How to Implement an LR(1) Parser](https://serokell.io/blog/how-to-implement-lr1-parser).
We will, however, introduce a few basic concepts required to understand this article better.

### Terminals, non-terminals, and production rules

A **terminal** is a lexical item of the language; in our case they will be represented by tokens that were produced by Alex.

> A **non-terminal** is an arbitrary identifier that's replaced by other terminals and non-terminals (terminals and non-terminals together are called **symbols**) to produce derivations, i.e., it's a description of how to group symbols together, meaning that a sequence that doesn't match any non-terminal is considered a syntax error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A **non-terminal** is a description of how the grammar can group symbols together. It's an arbitrary identifier that's replaced by other terminals and non-terminals (terminals and non-terminals together are called **symbols**) to produce derivations. A sequence that doesn't match any non-terminal is considered a syntax error.
```

Would this perhaps be better?

Author: Yep! Thanks.

In the example below, `myNonTerminal` is non-terminal.

A **production rule** is a rule describing how to "produce" a string that is syntactically valid according to the grammar. It joins terminals together to form a sentence.
It looks like so in Happy:

```happy
myNonTerminal
  : bodyA1 bodyA2 ... { actionA }
  | bodyB1 bodyB2 ... { actionB }
  | ...
```

n.b.: The ellipses here are not correct Happy grammar, and we use them to represent that more symbols may be present.

`body@#` where `@` is some letter and `#` some number means that the parser must parse each body in succession.

> The pipe (`|`) represents an alternation. The parser may parse any of the given bodies, accepting the one that matches.

Reviewer 3: I think it would be clearer to say that it represents OR? 

Otherwise, I read it, understood it, and had to think about what alternation means.

Author: Sure, I put it between parentheses.

> An alternative may be empty, meaning that `myNonTerminal : { action }` is also accepted.

Reviewer 3: There might be only one alternative?

Author: I don't understand your question, are you asking whether there may multiple empty alternatives? If so, then I guess no, otherwise it would be a reduce/reduce conflict.

Reviewer 3: Oh, I guess I was unclear, sorry. I will try to do code suggestions in the future. 

```
An alternative may be empty, meaning that `myNonTerminal : { action }` is also accepted.
```

to

```
There might be only one alternative, meaning that `myNonTerminal : { action }` is also accepted.
```

was my suggestion. 

But I now see that it is false. "An alternative might be empty" doesn't sound very great to me, but I am not sure how to phrase it better.

Reviewer: Well, there isn't a way to phrase it much better 😅 we do call production rules that do not have anything on the rhs "empty productions". Again, we could make the terminology in this section a bit more pedantic and talk about production bodies, then we can have something to the tune of "A body of a production [rule] may be empty".

Author: I liked this wording, so I changed it.

`action@` represents what the parser should do once it successfully parsers that rule, such as how to interpret what it has parsed, or how to build a data structure with it. Like in Alex, it may be any Haskell expression.

Production rules may also have an optional type signature.
For instance, the declaration of `myNonTerminal` could also have been written as such:

```happy
myNonTerminal :: { MyType }
  : bodyA1 bodyA2 ... { actionA }
  | bodyB1 bodyB2 ... { actionB }
  | ...
```

Where any Haskell type may replace `MyType`.

> As a concrete example, here's how we could describe a non-terminal for arithmetic operations, whose action is to evaluate such operations:

Reviewer 3: Is it a non-terminal or a production rule? Perhaps it can be helpful to say that arithmetic is a non-terminal, number, +, etc. are terminals, and something is a production rule?

Author: I think this phrasing should be clearer. What do you think?

There are a few more steps to get this example running, such as dealing with operator precedence and associativity.
Our goal is to provide arithmetic operations for MiniML as well, so we'll describe how to do it later in the tutorial. :)

We will also use the following notation representing productions.
This is not valid Happy code, but it's what it uses for debugging information.

```
myNonTerminal -> bodyA1 bodyA2 ...
myNonTerminal -> bodyB1 bodyB2 ...
myNonTerminal -> ...
```

There may be multiple productions in a single Happy file.

### Parser position

It's essential to introduce a notation that will be used later in this article.
We use a dot (`.`) to represent the current position of the parser.
For example, suppose we have the following:

```
exp -> exp . '+' exp
```

In this case, the parser has finished consuming the first `exp`, and it's about to consume the `+`.

### Look-ahead

The **look-ahead** represents the sequence of symbols that will be consumed next by the parser.
Happy is an LALR(1) parser, which means its look-ahead is 1, so it can see one incoming symbol.

> In the `exp` example above, the look-ahead symbol will be `+`.

Reviewer 3: You also say that it has finished consuming exp. If it has lookahead, doesn't it have the knowledge of + _while) consuming exp? So now that it starts consuming +, it would have the knowledge of next exp? 😅

Author: Yeah, the parser can make a decision based on its look-ahead symbol, judging by its current state, it can decide whether to shift or reduce. But I don't understand your point, do you want me to make a correction here?

Reviewer 3: I think there might be a need for correction, but I am not sure.

What I wanted to clarify, is whether saying the lookahead symbol is next one is relevant while you're between symbols. 

The big deal about lookahead, as I understand, is that you see the next symbol while consuming another one. So saying that the next symbol is the range of lookahead while you're between symbols seems odd -- you can also just consume it. 

If we assume that you're in the process of deciding how to consume the next symbol (+), then the lookahead 1 would see "exp", so the sentence seems false? 

Hope it makes sense. 😂

Reviewer: Okay, so to get into the nitty-gritty, we'd have to explain how LR parsers work in excruciating detail. Long story short, the only time lookahead really comes into play is when the parser is trying to decide between reduction and another action (perhaps another reduction). So it doesn't really make sense to talk about the parser being "between symbols". But yes, during the "shift" action, the current lookahead is shifted to the top of the stack, so it is in some sense "the current observed symbol".

In all honesty, this whole sentence is a bit vague, but if we don't want to get into frankly unnecessary detail, it's fine. In actuality, `n` in LR(n) and derivatives defines not so much the lookahead itself as how the automaton states are constructed, i.e. how many symbols following each production will be used to disambiguate its states (which makes it distinct from LL lookahead, where it is very literally lookahead).

Author: So from the principle of least effort, I'll leave it as it is, then, unless you have objections.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, it's gucci

### Actions (shift, reduce, goto, accept)

When working with Happy, two core concepts that you need to know are **shifting** and **reducing**, which I'll briefly explain.

An LR parser also contains a state machine, similarly to Alex.
This finite-state machine is called an _LR automaton_, which is also a DFA, which is used to make parsing decisions.
At the same time, the parser contains a stack with all the tokens consumed during parsing, making it a _pushdown automaton_.

> The parser produces an action table describing how to make decisions based on its stack and the look-ahead token.

Reviewer 3: This sounds like it does it in the act of parsing, but isn't an action table set once the parser is generated?

Author: Yeah, poor wording. I rephrased it.

  * One or more names for our parser. The syntax should be `%name PARSER_NAME [PRODUCTION]`. If the `PRODUCTION` is not given, it uses the first non-terminal that appears in the file.
  * What is the type of our tokens with `%tokentype`.
  * Which function should it call if there is a parse error with `%error`.
  * What is the monad that should be used and its canonical operations with `%monad` (we reuse `Alex` for simplicity).
  * Which function lexes tokens and how to extract the EOF token with `%lexer`.
* `%%`, after which we must specify the production rules for the grammar.
* A trailer to include more Haskell definitions, such as auxiliary files and the AST that will be built by the parser. You can also define those in another module if you prefer.

### Tokens

Since Happy operates on tokens, we must instruct it on how to match each token.
This is done using `%token`, which must be placed before the `%%` in the file.
For each token, on the left side, we'll put an alias that we can use to refer to our terminals.
On the right side, we use a Haskell pattern between braces indicating how Happy should match the tokens we've defined while working with Alex.

> ```alex

Reviewer 3: I think this is Happy? :D 

Also, the code highlighter doesn't highlight alex or happy -- it is the same as putting none. We can put Haskell, and see how it works if you want.

Author: It should be Happy, yeah. I use Neovim with [`vim-polyglot`](https://github.com/sheerun/vim-polyglot) (which contains [`vim-markdown`](https://github.com/preservim/vim-markdown)) and it displays the proper syntax highlighting for me. I know it won't display in the blog, but at least it looks nice on my editor.

I don't know how nice Haskell would look here, I think we can leave it as is and have it be interpreted as none.

  -- Constants
  string     { L.RangedToken (L.String _) _ }
  integer    { L.RangedToken (L.Integer _) _ }
  -- Keywords
  let        { L.RangedToken L.Let _ }
  in         { L.RangedToken L.In _ }
  if         { L.RangedToken L.If _ }
  then       { L.RangedToken L.Then _ }
  else       { L.RangedToken L.Else _ }
  -- Arithmetic operators
  '+'        { L.RangedToken L.Plus _ }
  '-'        { L.RangedToken L.Minus _ }
  '*'        { L.RangedToken L.Times _ }
  '/'        { L.RangedToken L.Divide _ }
  -- Comparison operators
  '='        { L.RangedToken L.Eq _ }
  '<>'       { L.RangedToken L.Neq _ }
  '<'        { L.RangedToken L.Lt _ }
  '<='       { L.RangedToken L.Le _ }
  '>'        { L.RangedToken L.Gt _ }
  '>='       { L.RangedToken L.Ge _ }
  -- Logical operators
  '&'        { L.RangedToken L.And _ }
  '|'        { L.RangedToken L.Or _ }
  -- Parenthesis
  '('        { L.RangedToken L.LPar _ }
  ')'        { L.RangedToken L.RPar _ }
  -- Lists
  '['        { L.RangedToken L.LBrack _ }
  ']'        { L.RangedToken L.RBrack _ }
  ','        { L.RangedToken L.Comma _ }
  -- Types
  ':'        { L.RangedToken L.Colon _ }
  '->'       { L.RangedToken L.Arrow _ }
```

> These tokens are the terminals used while writing the grammar. They are first-class, and we can use them among other symbols.

Reviewer 3: Do you perhaps mean the aliases, not the tokens?

Author: Yep, good point.

### Semantic actions

Now that we have the definitions of our tokens, we can now begin writing the parser itself.
We can start with top-level definitions of format `let example = 0`.
This will be a simplistic definition for now, but we will elaborate on it shortly.
Note that production rules must be placed after the `%%` in the file, and you may delete the `empty` production after inserting the one below.

```happy
dec
  : let identifier '=' integer {}
```

> We use `:` to describe the production to be parsed (called `dec`), denoting the tokens (defined above) to be parsed, separated by spaces.

Reviewer 3: Is dec not a non-terminal? 

Or is production a group of non-terminals? 

Sorry. 😆

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30162364/173370509-f7ff7835-3077-4853-a770-c248ec53ad1f.png)

I think it depends on how pedantic we want to get with the terminology. A production is a substitution of form `a -> b`. `a` is the production header to which we can refer to the non-terminal described here. `b` is the production body, which groups symbols together. To be honest, I'm still a bit confused by this, by the terminology, but seems like it's non-terminal, changed it.

To be honest, I'm also a bit confused with the terminology. @lierdakil perhaps can help clear the confusion?

Reviewer: Production head isn't necessarily a single non-terminal. This is true for context-free grammars (i.e. that the head is always a non-terminal) which we consider here, but not for context-dependent ones. Hence the distinction. It also bears mentioning that a single production head can (and usually will) have multiple corresponding production rules (with different bodies), so referring to "a production" by its head is ambiguous.

In this here example, "Exp", "Exp1", "Term" and "Factor" are non-terminals, "let", "var", etc are terminals, and "Exp : let var '=' Exp in Exp" is a single production rule, as is "Exp : Exp1", or "Term : Factor".

Author: So my understanding is the following:
* In Happy, a production head and a non-terminal refer to the same thing, as it has form `a : b` instead of `a b c : d` (which is a CSG), for example.
* A production with form `a : b | c` is the same as having two production rules `a : b` and `a : c`. And so, each pair with the head and body forms a production rule. Furthermore, `b` and `c` are also individually referred to as the bodies of `a` (note the plural).
* In Happy, it's not correct to refer to the production body as a non-terminal, and therefore, I should have said here that "We use `:` to describe the production body to be parsed (whose production head is `dec`)." These two in conjunction form a production [rule]. (I changed to this phrasing BTW)

Reviewer: > In Happy, a production head and a non-terminal refer to the same thing

Arguably, yes. The insufferable pedant inside my head says these are distinct entities, but practically in a CFG there's no difference between a non-terminal and a production head, every production head is a non-terminal and vice versa (otherwise the grammar would be incomplete)

> A production with form a : b | c is the same as having two production rules a : b and a : c

Yes, at least from the theoretical standpoint. IIRC, Happy doesn't handle the latter syntax, however.

>  each pair with the head and body forms a production rule

 Yes.

>  Furthermore, b and c are also individually referred to as the bodies of a (note the plural).

Technically, bodies of productions with head `a`, but this is somewhat useless pedantry.

> it's not correct to refer to the production body as a non-terminal

This is true regardless of Happy (unless a given production body consists of a single non-terminal, which is somewhat rare).

And that's it.
Well, apart from the fact it does nothing useful but recognizes strings that match this definition or throws a parse error otherwise.

We usually want to perform an action simultaneously once something is successfully parsed.
We can put between the braces a semantic action that does something with the identifier and its integer.
For example, we could choose to create an interpreter or build a syntax tree, which is what we will do.

### Abstract syntax trees

An abstract syntax tree (AST) describes the exact structure of the expressions we are parsing.

> Before we continue parsing further, we should define the AST either in a new file and import it in our parser or at the trailer of the Happy file.

Reviewer 3: I don't understand the word "trailer" in this context.

Author: Happy calls the top of the file "header" and the bottom of the file "trailer". A little before I talk about this stuff, I've changed there to make it more evident.

In `arguments`, the first production means that it's allowed to parse nothing, in which case we yield the empty list.

Some people like to place a comment instead when something is empty, like so:
```happy
arguments :: { [Argument L.Range] }
  : {- empty -}        { [] }
  | argument arguments { $1 : $2 }
```

I'm not personally a fan of doing this, but if this is clearer to you, feel free to do it. ;)

Even though this code works, it leads to some undesirable repetition.
Notably, we repeat two productions for accepting an optional type annotation.
Thankfully, Happy allows for _parameterized productions_, which you can think of as being similar to a function taking parsers as arguments.

Let us define a utility which we will call `optional`:

```happy
optional(p)
  :   { Nothing }
  | p { Just $1 }
```

The first alternative is to parse nothing, which we indicate by putting no productions in it and a semantic action returning `Nothing`.
The second alternative is to parse the given parser, called `p` here.

To parse the argument list, we will create another utility that parses a production `p` zero or more times, which we call `many`.

> Additionally, it's recommended to use left recursions instead of right recursions, so we'd use `arguments argument` in the code above.

Reviewer 3: Left recursion instead of right recursion?

Author: Did you mean to remove the plural of these words? Ok, done.

  -- Logical operators
  | exp '&'  exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (And (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
  | exp '|'  exp             { EBinOp (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 (Or (L.rtRange $2)) $3 }
```

n.b.: Do NOT extract these operators to a new production and change it to `exp operator exp` because of a limitation in Happy. This will cause conflicts that will be pretty difficult to resolve.
You could work around it using `%prec`, but you will have to list all lookahead terminals in the operator precedence table.

Remember that we previously defined the precedences and associativities of each operator; otherwise, Happy would generate 168 shift/reduce conflicts. I will copy and paste them here yet again in case you've missed them:

```happy
%right '->'
%left '|'
%left '&'
%nonassoc '=' '<>' '<' '>' '<=' '>='
%left '+' '-'
%left '*' '/'
```

With it, we now have 12 shift/reduce conflicts.

You could observe that the left-hand side of an operator is always an `atom` and change it accordingly, but this will be no good.
Even though it would remove all of the shift/reduce conflicts, it would also have the side-effect that **the tree would always be right-biased**.

> You could live with it and properly balance the tree afterward (see the "rotation" method for `Dynamic infix operators with Alex and Happy` at the end of the article on how to do it). Still, in this case, it's possible to resolve this only by tweaking the grammar, so let's do it.

Reviewer 3: Would it perhaps be better to just link it?

Author: Done.

    (ELetIn _ (Dec _ (Name _ "b") [] Nothing (EInt _ 1))
    (ELetIn _ (Dec _ (Name _ "c") [] Nothing (EInt _ 2))
    (EBinOp _ (EBinOp _ (EVar _ (Name _ "a")) (Times _) (EVar _ (Name _ "c"))) (Plus _) (EBinOp _ (EVar _ (Name _ "b")) (Times _) (EVar _ (Name _ "c")))))))
  , Dec _ (Name _ "main") [Argument _ (Name _ "unit") (Just (TUnit _))] (Just (TUnit _))
    (EApp _ (EVar _ (Name _ "print")) (EPar _ (EBinOp _ (EString _ "\"The answer is: \"") (Plus _) (EVar _ (Name _ "the_answer")))))
  ]
```

To finish, let's just make one last change to our parser. At the top of the file, add the following:

```diff
 %lexer { lexer } { L.RangedToken L.EOF _ }
+%expect 0
```

This tells Happy that it should expect exactly zero shift/reduce conflicts.
Happy will always expect no reduce/reduce conflicts when this directive is present, no matter the provided value.

You can find the complete grammar [here](https://gist.github.com/heitor-lassarote/5f24f40c8625f25c6108ee59dc10e6d5).

### Exercises

1. Change your lexer and parser to accept fractional numbers.
Besides accepting numbers such as `3.14`, it should also accept exponents, like `12.5e-4`.

> <details>

Reviewer 3: Hint jumps out of the list element. 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/35335196/173023730-2563dfbd-14fa-4a9c-81c1-865524272da3.png)

Author: In my markdown viewer, I put `<br>` because everything was glued together, but I removed it if it'll look better in the blog.

Reviewer: I believe to avoid the hint "jumping out" you need to indent the whole `<details>` block. We use markdown-it on the blog, so it will parse/render similarly to https://markdown-it.github.io/

Reviewer: I believe to avoid the hint "jumping out" you need to indent the whole `<details>` block. We use markdown-it on the blog, so it will parse/render similarly to https://markdown-it.github.io/

Author: They seem to render differently for me, and indenting details doesn't seem to help... to be honest, adding `<br>` also looks better in this link, so I left this block of code as it is. @NaeosPsy, is it better in the blog without this? Or should I still try to figure out how to make it prettier?

Reviewer 3: I think it should be indented. 

I am having problems with it myself, haha, but you can check out other articles like @lierdakil lambda calculus one where he did the thing.

As such, these libraries have caveats like not being able to handle left-recursion. Their performance can also exponentially degrade due to backtracking.

While comparing the implementations of both parsing techniques is beyond the scope of this post, you can read two suggested blog posts for more information: [From recursive descent to LR parsing](https://www.abubalay.com/blog/2021/12/31/lr-control-flow) and [Which Parsing Approach?](https://tratt.net/laurie/essays/entries/which_parsing_approach.html).

Another difference between these libraries is that Happy is a parser generator.
It means that instead of writing Haskell files (`.hs`) like you do with Megaparsec, you will write Happy (`.y`) files. Those will generate Haskell files with implementations of the parser recognizing the described grammar.

To sum it up, here are some pros and cons of Happy in comparison to Megaparsec:

Pros:
* Parser generators report ambiguous grammars to the user, creating greater trust in the parser's output and saving from debugging headaches.
* Bottom-up parsers can handle left-recursion, while top-down parsers can't.

> * The performance will be more predictable, as Megaparsec can cause exponential time complexity with the use of `try`. In addition, Happy's "static" generated LALR algorithm has better known complexity constraints.

Reviewer 3: "static" generated? Something doesn't sounds right.

We will, however, introduce a few basic concepts required to understand this article better.

### High-level overview of parsing

When talking about parsing, we generally imply we're parsing some language, a formal language in the case of programming languages.
But what is a language?

The formal theory of language offers a very simple answer: a **language** is a (likely infinite) set of all grammatically correct sentences.
Now, a "sentence" is used in a very general sense in this case, as in a complete program in C would still constitute a "sentence".
Well, but how do you describe an infinite set of sentences?
By specifying how how to build any arbitrary sentence.

This description is called a **formal grammar**.
The usual approach uses strings substitutions to construct a sentence.
The process of constructing a sentence itself is called a **derivation** process, which is represented as a sequence of substituions called a _derivation chain_.
Either can be called simply _derivation_ for short.

Parsing is in some sense a process inverse to derivation: instead of building an arbitrary sentence, we're given a sentence and want to recovery the derivation that produced it.

> In our case, at each parsing step, we want to build an **abstract syntax tree** (AST), which is a data structure that describes the exact structure of the language we're parsing.

Reviewer 3: Is it language? Would code (or sentence) not be more accurate?

Cons:
* Less idiomatic, as you need to write Alex and Happy grammars instead of Haskell code.
* Less flexible since you can't touch the algorithm on how Happy works. Meanwhile, you can easily create your functions for parser combinators.
* Dealing with operator precedence and associativity requires more labor. There are standard tools to deal with them, but once you need something that is non-standard, you'll need to write more non-trivial parser rules by hand.

Comparing the implementations of both parsing techniques is beyond the scope of this post. Still, if you are interested, you may read the parser combinators article linked above.

## How it works

An in-depth explanation of how an LR(1) parser works is well beyond the scope of this tutorial. For this, we recommend you read our article on [how to Implement an LR(1) Parser](https://serokell.io/blog/how-to-implement-lr1-parser).
We will, however, introduce a few basic concepts required to understand this article better.

> ### Terminals, non-terminals, and production rules

Reviewer 3: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/35335196/173025337-846e28d5-4c08-417d-a3c8-d5d58067c3f4.png)
https://nadia-polikarpova.github.io/cse130-web/lectures/06-parsing.html

Perhaps this can be useful

Author: Added some simplified sentences according to it. Hope it makes it a bit easier to understand.

## Our grammar: MiniML

We discussed our grammar in the previous article, but let's reintroduce it here.

MiniML (read as "minimal") is a small grammar based on [ML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ML_(programming_language)).
As the name suggests, it has the minimal syntax needed to get you started with Alex and Happy.

By the end of this tutorial, you will be able to parse programs such as the following:

```sml
let the_answer : int =
  let a = 20 in
  let b = 1 in
  let c = 2 in
  a * c + b * c

let main (unit : ()) : () =
  print ("The answer is: " + the_answer)
```

Some of the features that this tutorial will cover are:

* Variables, constants, function declarations, function applications, local bindings, and operators.
* Some simple types, as well as arrow types (functions).
* Conditional expressions: if-then-else and if-then.

In addition, exercises will guide you through extending the language with patterns, list access, and pattern matching. The first part also introduced block comments (in the main text) and rational numbers and line comments (in exercises).

> ## Happy vs. Megaparsec

Reviewer 3: I think we can cut some stuff from this. 

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_LYHCUzjDbjngeuQfdyCctAdnADEk60oR_-PrJ_nOFY/edit <- This is what I have on offer.

Reviewer: I think I agree it makes sense to cut extraneous stuff from here, as it's not the main focus. I'm not exactly convinced the linked blog post is helpful in comparing recursive descent with LR. From a quick Google search, I found https://www.abubalay.com/blog/2021/12/31/lr-control-flow which gets into more detail about LR (I didn't review it in much detail though, so can't vouch there aren't any horrible mistakes lurking), and there's https://tratt.net/laurie/essays/entries/which_parsing_approach.html which doesn't really get into much detail, but gives a reasonable overview of recursive descent vs LL vs LR (and also throws in some discussion of generalized CFG parsers like GLR, GLL and Earley)

Author: I've copy-pasted your article, I think it's better overall, as going into details is not our focus. I also added links to the suggested articles instead.

Another difference is that Alex is a lexer generator and Happy a parser generator.
It means that instead of writing Haskell files (`.hs`) like you do with Megaparsec, you will write Alex (`.x`) and Happy (`.y`) files, which in turn will automatically generate Haskell files with implementations of the lexer and parser recognizing the described grammar.

Below are some pros and cons of Happy in comparison to Megaparsec:

Pros:
* Ambiguous grammars are reported to the user with parser generators, allowing a greater trust in the parser's output and saving the debugging headache.
* Bottom-up parsers can handle left-recursion, while top-down can't.
* The performance will be more predictable, as Megaparsec can cause exponential time complexity with the use of `try`. In addition, Happy's "static" generated LALR algorithm has better known complexity constraints.

Cons:
* Less idiomatic, as you need to write Alex and Happy grammars instead of Haskell code.
* Less flexible since you can't touch the algorithm on how Happy works. Meanwhile, you can easily create your functions for parser combinators.

> * Dealing with operator precedence and associativity requires more labor. There are standard tools to deal with them, but once you need something that is non-standard, you'll need to write more non-trivial parser rules by hand.

Reviewer: Uh. This got into the wrong place =\ It's in fact easier to deal with operator precedence in LR than in LL/recursive descent (even if it can be somewhat annoying at times)

Author: Oh, ok, I think by standard tools you mean things like `makeExprParser`, right? I put it together with the pros and reworded it a bit.

I was under the impression that you meant that `%left`, `%nonassoc` and `%right` are the standard tools. But to be honest, the first time I dealt with operator precedence in Megaparsec, I manually implemented the [precedence climbing method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operator-precedence_parser#Precedence_climbing_method) as I didn't know about `makeExprParser`, so doing it in Happy was much easier ^^'

Reviewer: >  things like makeExprParser, right?

Yes.

Comparing the implementations of both parsing techniques is beyond the scope of this post. Still, if you are interested, you may read the parser combinators article linked above.

## How it works

An in-depth explanation of how an LR(1) parser works is well beyond the scope of this tutorial. For this, we recommend you read our article on [how to Implement an LR(1) Parser](https://serokell.io/blog/how-to-implement-lr1-parser).
We will, however, introduce a few basic concepts required to understand this article better.

### Terminals, non-terminals, and production rules

A **terminal** is a lexical item of the language. In our case, they will be represented by tokens that were produced by Alex.

> They will represent the leaves of our tree.

Reviewer: > leaves of our tree

I'm not entirely sure we introduced the concept of a tree prior? If not, then "our tree" is too unspecific, perhaps use a more precise language, e.g. "... the leaves of the syntax tree"

A **non-terminal** is a description of how the grammar can group symbols together. It's an arbitrary identifier that's replaced by other terminals and non-terminals (terminals and non-terminals together are called **symbols**) to produce derivations. A sequence that doesn't match any non-terminal is considered a syntax error.
In the example below, `myNonTerminal` is non-terminal.
They will represent the internal nodes of our tree.

A **production rule** is a rule describing how to "produce" a string that is syntactically valid according to the grammar. It joins terminals together to form a sentence.
This is how it looks in Happy:

```happy
myNonTerminal
  : bodyA1 bodyA2 ... { actionA }
  | bodyB1 bodyB2 ... { actionB }
  | ...
```

n.b.: The ellipses here are not correct Happy grammar. We use them to represent that more symbols may be present.

* `body@#` where `@` is some letter and `#` some number means that the parser must parse each body in succession.

> * The pipe (`|`) represents an alternation (an _or_). The parser may parse any of the given bodies, accepting the one that matches. An alternative may be empty, meaning that `myNonTerminal : { action }` is also accepted.

Reviewer: Now that I read this in context, perhaps s/An alternative may be empty/A body may be empty/

  | '(' '<>' ')'             { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) (Neq (L.rtRange $2)) }
  | '(' '<' ')'              { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) (Lt (L.rtRange $2)) }
  | '(' '<=' ')'             { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) (Le (L.rtRange $2)) }
  | '(' '>' ')'              { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) (Gt (L.rtRange $2)) }
  | '(' '>=' ')'             { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) (Ge (L.rtRange $2)) }
  -- Logical operators
  | '(' '&' ')'              { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) (And (L.rtRange $2)) }
  | '(' '|' ')'              { EOp (L.rtRange $1 <-> L.rtRange $3) (Or (L.rtRange $2)) }
```

#### Parsing let-in

Finally, let's see how we can do `let...in...`, the final expression in our language.

Let's add a new case to `exp` and see what happens:

```happy
  | dec in exp               { ELetIn (info $1 <-> info $3) $1 $3 }
```

12 shift/reduce conflicts. Not cool. However, by looking at `Parser.info`, we can see this is a case that we are already familiar with. 
It is similar to how conditional expressions interacted with operators, although now with `let...in...` instead of `if...then...else...`.

> To illustrate, should `let a = b in a + b` be parsed as `(let a = b in a) + c` or `let a = b in (a + b)`?

Reviewer: > `(let a = b in a) + c`

A typo here, should be `(let a = b in a) + b`
